1. 	introduction 
　hardly any sophisticated signal understanding task can be performed using the raw numerical signal values directly; some description of the signal must first be obtained. an initial description ought to be as compact as possible  and its elements should correspond as closely as possible to meaningful objects or events in the signal-forming process. frequently  local extrema in the signal and its derivatives- and intervals bounded by extrema-are particularly appropriate descriptive primitives: although local and closely tied to the signal data  these events often have direct semantic interpretations  e.g. as edges in images. a description that characterizes a signal by its extrema and those of its first few derivatives is a qualitative description of exactly the kind we were taught to use in elementary calculus to  sketch  a function. 
　a great deal of effort has been expended to obtain this kind of primitive qualitative description  for overviews of this literature  see  1 1 .  and the problem has proved extremely difficult. the problem of scale has emerged consistently as a fundamental source of difficulty  because the events we perceive and find meaningful vary enormously in size and extent. the problem is not so much to eliminate fine-scale noise  as to separate events at different scales arising from distinct physical processes. it is possible to introduce a parameter of scale by smoothing the signal with a mask of variable size  but with the introduction of scale-dependence comes ambiguity: every setting of the scale parameter yields a different description; new extremal points may appear  and existing ones may move or disappear. how can we decide which if any of this continuum of descriptions is  right   
　there is rarely a sound basis for setting the scale parameter. in fact  it has become apparent that for many tasks no one scale of description is categorically correct: the physical processes that generate signals such as images act at a variety of scales  none intrinsically more interesting or important than another. thus the ambiguity introduced by scale is inherent and inescapable  so the goal of scale-dependent description cannot be to eliminate this ambiguity  but rather to manage it effectively  and reduce it where possible. 
　this line of thinking has led to considerable interest in multi-scale descriptions  1 1 . however  merely computing descriptions at multiple scales does not solve the problem; if anything  it exacerbates it by increasing the volume of data. some means must be found to organize or simplify the description  by relating one scale to another. some work has been done in this area aimed at obtaining  edge pyramids   e.g.    but no clear-cut criteria for constructing them have been put forward. marr  suggested that zero-crossings that coincide over several scales are  physically significant   but this idea was neither justified nor tested. 
　how  then  can descriptions at different scales be related to each other in an organized  natural  and compact way  our solution  which we call scale-space filtering  begins by continuously varying the scale parameter  sweeping out a surface that we call the scale-space image. in this representation  it is possible to track extrema as they move continuously with scale changes  and to identify the singular points at which new extrema appear. the scale-space image is then collapsed into a tree  providing a concise but complete qualitative description of the signal over all scales of observation.1 
1. 	the scale-space image 
　descriptions that depend on scale can be computed in many ways. as a primitive scale-parameterization  the gaussian convolution is attractive for a number of its properties  amounting to  well-behavedness : the gaussian is symmetric and strictly decreasing about the mean  and therefore the weighting assigned to signal values decreases smoothly with distance. the gaussian convolution behaves well near the limits of the scale parameter  sigma  approaching the un-smoothed signal for small 1  and approaching the signal's mean for large cr. the gaussian is also readily differentiated and integrated. 
　the gaussian is not the only convolution kernel that meets these criteria. however  a more specific motivation for our choice is a property of the gaussian convolution's 
*a complementary approach to the  natural  scale problem has been developed by hoffman . 

1 a. witkin 

figure 1. a sequence of gaussian smoothings of a waveform  with decreasing from top to bottom. each graph is a constant- profile from the scale-space image. 
zero-crossings  and those of its derivatives : as decreases  additional zeroes may appear  but existing ones cannot in general disappear; moreover  of convolution kernels satisfying  well behavedness  criteria  roughly those enumerated above   the gaussian is the only one guaranteed to satisfy this condition . the usefulness of this property will be explained in the following sections. 
　the gaussian convolution of a signal / z  depends both on z  the signal's independent variable  and on a  the gaussian's standard deviation. the convolution is given by 

 i  
where  *  denotes convolution with respect to x . this function defines a surface on the  z   -plane  where each profile of constant is a gaussian-smoothed version of / z   the amount of smoothing increasing with sigma. we will call the  z  r -plane scale space   and the function  f  defined in  1   the scale-space image of f.1 fig. 1 graphs a sequence of gaussian smoothings with increasing   these are constant r profiles from the scale-space image. 
　at any value of   the extrema in the nth derivative of the smoothed signal are given by the zero-crossings in the  n + l th derivative  computed using the relation 

where the derivatives of the gaussian are readily obtained. although the methods presented here apply to zeros in any derivative  we will restrict our attention to those in the second. these are extrema of slope  i.e. inflection points. in terms of the scale-space image  the inflections at ail values of a are the points that satisfy 
		 1  
1lt is actually convenient to treat log as the scale parameter  uniform expansion or contraction of the signal in the zdirection will cause a translation of the scale-space image along the log axis. 

figure 1. contours of fxx = 1 in a scale-space image. the x-axis is horizontal; the coarsest scale is on top. to simulate the effect of a continuous scale-change on the qualitative description  hold a straight-edge  or better still  a slit  horizontally. the intersections of the edge with the zero-contours are the extremal points at some single value of a. moving the edge up or down increases or decreases 
using subscript notation to indicate partial differentiation.1 
1. 	coarse-to-fine tracking 
the contours of  mark the appearance and mo-
tion of inflection points in the smoothed signal  and provide the raw material for a qualitative description over all scales  in terms of inflection points. next  we will apply two simplifying assumptions to these contours:  1  the identity assumption  that extrema observed at different scales  but lying on a common zero-contour in scale space  arise from a single underlying event  and  1  the localization assumption  that the true location of an event giving rise to a zero-contour is the contour's z location as - 1. 
　referring to fig. 1  notice that the zero contours form arches  closed above  but open below. the restriction that zero-crossings may never disappear with with decreasing a  see section 1  means that the contours may never be closed below. note that at the apexes of the arches  fxxx = 1  so by eq.  1   these points do not belong to the contour. each arch consists of a pair of contours  crossing zero with opposite sign. 
　the localization assumption is motivated by the observation that linear smoothing has two effects: qualitative simplification-the removal of fine-scale features-and spatial distortion-dislocation  broadening and flattening of the features that survive. the latter undesirable effect may be overcome  by tracking coarse extrema to their fine-scale locations. thus  a coarse scale may be used to identify extrema  and a fine scale  to localize them. each zero-contour therefore reduces to an  z    pair  specifying its fine-scale location on the z-axis  and the coarsest scale at which the contour appears. 
a coarse-to-fine tracking description is compared to the 
1note that the second condition in  1  excludes zero-crossings that are parallel to the z-axis  because these are not zerocrossings in the convolved signal. 

figure 1. above is shown a signal with a coarse-tofine tracking approximation superimposed. the approximation was produced by independent parabolic fits between 

a. witkin 1 


 the localized inflections. below is shown the corresponding  qualitatively isomorphic  gaussian smoothing. corresponding linear smoothing in fig. 1 
1. 	the interval tree 
　while coarse-to-fine tracking solves the problem of localizing large-scale events  it does not solve the multi-scale integration problem  because the description still depends on the choice of the continuous global scale parameter  
   just as simple linear filtering does. in this section  we reduce the scale-space image to a simple tree  concisely but completely describing the qualitative structure of the signal over all scales of observation. 
　this simplification rests on a basic property of the scalespace image: as sigma is varied  extremal points in the smoothed signal appear and disappear at singular points  the tops of the arches in fig. 1.  passing through such a point with decreasing sigma  a pair of extrema of opposite sign appear in the smoothed signal. at these points  and only these points  the undistinguished interval  i.e. an interval bounded by extremal points but containing none  in which the singularity occurs splits into three subintervals. in general  each undistinguished interval  observed in scale space  is bounded on each side by the zero contours that define it  bounded above by the singular point at which it merges into an enclosing interval  and bounded below by the singular point at which it divides into sub-intervals. 
　consequently  to each interval  /  corresponds a node in a  generally ternary-branching  tree  whose parent node denotes the larger interval from which / emerged  and whose offspring represent the smaller intervals into which / subdivides. each interval also defines a rectangle in scalespace  denoting its location and extent on the signal  as defined by coarse-to-fine tracking  and its location and extent on the scale dimension. collectively  these rectangles 
1in this and all illustrations  approximations were drawn by fitting parabolic arcs independently to the signal data on each interval marked by the description. this procedure is crude  particularly because continuity is not enforced across inflections. bear in mind that this procedure has been used only to display the qualitative description. 

figure 1. a signal with its interval tree  represented as a rectangular tesselation of scale-space. each rectangle is a node  indicating an interval on the signal  and the scale interval over which the signal interval exists. 
tesselate the  x  sigma -plane. see fig. 1 for an illustration of the tree. 
　this interval tree may be viewed in two ways: as describing the signal simultaneously at all scales  or as generating a family of single-scale descriptions  each defined by a subset of nodes in the tree that cover the z-axis. on the second interpretation  one may move through the family of descriptions in orderly  local  discrete steps  either by choosing to subdivide an interval into its offspring  or to merge a triple of intervals into their parent.1 
　we found that it is in general possible  by moving interactively through the tree and observing the resulting  sketch  of the signal  to closely match observers' spontaneously perceived descriptions. thus the interval tree  though tightly constrained  seems flexible enough to capture human perceptual intuitions. somewhat surprisingly  we found that the tree  rather than being too constraining  is not constrained enough. that is  the perceptually salient descriptions can in general be duplicated within the tree's constraints  but the tree also generates many descriptions that plainly have no perceptual counterpart. this observation led us to develop a stability criterion for further pruning 
or ordering the states of the tree  which is described in the next section. 
1. 	stability 
　recall that to each interval in the tree corresponds a rectangle in scale space. the x boundaries locate the interval on the signal. the sigma boundaries define the scale range over which the interval exists  its stability over scale changes. we have observed empirically a marked correspondence between the stability of an interval and its perceptual salience: those intervals that survive over a broad range of scales 
1for previous uses of hierarchic signal descriptions see e.g.  1 1 . 

1 a. witkin 

 figure 1. several signals  with their maximum-stability descriptions. these are  top-level  descriptions  generated automatically and without thresholds. you should compare the descriptions to your own first-glance  top-level  percepts   the noisy sine and square waves are synthetic signals.  tend to leap out at the eye  while the most ephemeral are not perceived at all. to capture this relation  we have devised several versions of a stability criterion  one of which picks a  top-level  description by descending the tree until a local maximum in stability is found. another iteratively removes nodes from the tree  splicing out nodes that are less stable than any of their parents and offspring. both of these radically improve correspondence between the interval tree's descriptions and perceptual features  see fig. 
　we are currently developing applications of scale-space filtering to several signal matching and interpretation problems  and investigating its ability to explain perceptual grouping phenomena. the method is also being extended to apply to two-dimensional images: the scale-space image of a 1-d signal occupies a volume  containing zero-crossing surfaces.1 
