1. 	introduction 
　perceptual organization is easier to experience than to define  see fig. 1.  the exquisite  curving parallel striations  the blobs  swirls  patches  edges  etc. leap out at us even when we have no idea what in particular we're seeing. these rich and vivid phenomena have long been the object of study by psychologists  most notably in the gestalt school  e.g.   l   and more recently   1 .  the concern  however  has been almost entirely with the what of organization  hardly at all with the why. where the issue of purpose has been addressed at all  it has generally been assumed that the goal of organization is to describe the image in a compact or convenient form  re-arranging it but adding no empirical content. 
　we propose that perceptual organization is not a description of the image at all  but a primitive  skeletal causal explanation. when we perceive the striations of fig. 1 as a 
fixed profile  swept along a smooth trajectory and smoothly deforming along the way  the meaning of our percept is not just that the image can be generated that way  but that it really was. the basis for these primitive inferences is the discovery of similarities-literal spatiotemporal ones-that are extremely unlikely to arise by accident. 
　the way we discover similarities and use them to understand what we see  even at the primitive level of perceiving visible surfaces  strikingly resembles processes of discovery and explanation at the highest levels of abstraction and sophistication  exemplified in domains such as linguistics  biology  and geology. within the constraints that non-accidental regularities provide  deeper interpretation proceeds by labeling  refining  and elaborating the initial model  discovering new regularities along the way as additional knowledge can be brought to bear. 
　primitive perception is intelligence in microcosm: specialized  limited to the immediate spatiotemporal arena of the visual world  sacrificing flexibility for astounding power and speed; in a sense  an idiot savant. yet all the essential principles and methods of scientific discovery and explanation appear to be in place. 

figure 1. perceptual organization is easier to experience than to define. 
1. 	the laws of organization 
　to investigate the purpose of perceptual organization  we must have some notion of what perceptual organization does: its language-the set of elements and relations we perceive and the laws or principles that map expressions in that language onto particular images. we need not review the long history of organizational laws in the gestalt tradition. it suffices to observe that relations of literal resemblance figure prominently in perceptual organization: when we can perceive a piece of the image by copying or smoothly sweeping simple elements  we are strongly inclined to do so. when we see parallel lines  we see their common form  and we see the simple relation  e.g. translation  that holds between them. any list of the relations associated with organization would surely include  along with parallelism: colinearity or smooth continuation; common fate or rigidity; coherent spatial or temporal flow; symmetry; smoothly changing brightness  color  or texture over a region; etc. all of these  like parallelism  can be expressed as the replication or continuation of a base element through space or time  perhaps with smooth deformation along the way. to say that we perceive the image in these terms whenever possible is to characterize perceptual organization as the vigorous rooting out of relations of similarity. 
　
1 a. witkin and j. tenenbaum 
1. 	causal links 
　the key to the meaning of perceptual organization is that all of these relations frequently arise for a variety of good reasons-ultimately because the world around us is coherent over space and time. they are however extremely unlikely to hold by chance  among elements that aren't directly related. therefore  when we can derive one piece of the image from another by a simple transformation  it almost certainly isn't an accident. the more complex the transform's operands  and the more precise the transformation  the less likely the relation is to be spurious. this argument has been developed in more detail in   with a related but distinct account by lowe and binford . we won't belabor it here; a simple example will make the point. 
　if we see two highly irregular but perfectly parallel curves  we can be quite certain that their correspondence is not an accident  even if we have no idea where the curves came from. there might be many reasons for their similarity  but there must be some reason. asserting that the relation can't be accidental imposes a definite constraint 
on whatever explanation we might adopt for the curves: any explanation that claims the shapes of the curves arose independently  that they just happen to look the same  must be wrong. as we shall see  this is actually a rather strong constraint. 
　continuing the example of parallel curves  asserting that their parallelism is not an accident implies that any process that determined the shape of either curve determined the shapes of both curves in common; and that conversely  any process that acted independently on one curve but not the other acted transparently  in the sense that its effect at most was merely to copy the underlying common form. however we try to construct an explanation that violates these conditions  we will find we have implied that the relation is accidental  in whole or in part. the bare assertion of non-accidentalness thus irrevocably divides the entire generating process into two parts: a common determinant of shape  and a transparent replication. this broad division provides a primitive skeletal model for the generating process as the replication of a common form. any subsequent enlightenment we receive can only elaborate and refine the model's internal structure  but never really supplant or negate it. 
　again  some simple examples will point out what the skeletal model does and does not specify. there is an endless list of plausible explanations that account for the parallel curves by replication of a common shape. for instance  they might both have been traced from a third curve; either might be a photograph of the other; they might be the borders of a winding road  or tracks left in the ground by a rake  etc. all of these plainly account for the curves by replicating a single shape  although they do so in very different ways  even assigning different directions of causality. all are elaborations of the same basic model  but without further evidence we are free to fantasize about the nature of the common cause and the manner  causal path  and degree of directness of the replication. 
　now suppose we try to modify one of these models to make it inconsistent with the skeletal model  but without attributing the parallelism to chance. we might plausibly decide that both curves were hand-traced from a third  but suppose we also asserted that the tracer's hand slipped badly while reproducing one of the curves. we must now introduce a second change to balance the first  because the curves are parallel. if we claimed that exactly the same mistake was independently made in tracing the other curve  we would be attributing that part of the parallelism to chance. on the other hand  if we claimed that the mistake was deliberately repeated on the second tracing-a non-accidental relation-we would be adding the original mistake to the underlying form  and its duplication to the replication component  elaborating but not violating the skeletal model. if we claimed that the mistake was erased and corrected  and therefore invisible in the final result  then the combination of mistake-erasure-correction is predictably and lawfully transparent to shape  just a step in the replication process  so the skeletal model is still preserved. as these simple examples suggest  any explanation inconsistent with the skeletal model negates the assertion of non-accidentalness. thus  as long as that assertion is retained  any explanation we eventually adopt must amount to an elaboration or refinement of the skeletal model. 
　if perceptual organization provides skeletal causal models  and if these models can be elaborated but never discarded  then our most primitive organizational percepts ought always to survive  embellished but still intact  to the highest levels of interpretation. and of course they nearly always do. some pictures  e.g. micrographs  are so alien to our ordinary world that the naive observer may have no idea what they portray  beyond the spots  swirls  bands  etc. of pure organization. when the naive observer becomes an informed one  understanding in detail what the picture means and where it comes from  the spots and swirls never vanish. on the contrary  the informed observer is usually able to explain them in detail. a spot  for instance  may no longer be seen as a spot but as a cell  yet its form survives. a finely striated structure may become a coherent bundle of nerve fibers  but again its underlying form sur-
vives intact. 
　we have argued that regularities such as parallelism are unlikely to be accidental  and that the assertion that they are not implies a primitive skeletal model of the generating process  as the replication of a common form. since perceptual organization does discover similarities  and does represent them as replications of common forms  we interpret perceptual organization as expressing exactly these primitive explanations. perceptual organization is discovery  not description. 
1. 	from perception to cognition 
　viewing organization as explanation immediately draws a connection between primitive perception and the broader cognitive realms of discovery  induction  and causal reasoning: the discovery of compelling regularities;-relations that  can't be an accident -is a basic ingredient in discovery and explanation even at the highest levels of abstraction.  seeing the pattern  in a body of phenomena is the critical step toward deeply understanding the phenomena. is this seeming relation between primitive perception and cognition a superficial one  frankly  we feel the resemblance is too strong to be an accident. we want to explore this connection in part because even the hint of unity across so broad a gulf is intrinsically exciting  and also because we feel the connection can shed some immediate light on the manner in which perceptual organization contributes to such basic activities as perceiving surfaces. 
　many sophisticated problems of causal explanation actually resemble perception quite closely in overall form: given a picture of the present-not a literal picture  but a more abstract body of observations-construct a model of the processes and events that generated it  in light of knowledge of the domain. we will draw some observations from three such problems-inferring ancient languages  
species  and geological structures from modern ones. 
　first  we find repeatedly that the discovery of nonaccidental similarities is the point of departure for explanation  as we have argued it is in perceptual organization. moreover  the discovery of similarities may be clearly distinguished from their attribution to particular sorts of events. for instance  a dolphin blatantly resembles a fish. if we conclude that a dolphin is a kind of fish  descended from fishes  we are wrong. even so  the resemblance is no accident  but a striking instance of systematic convergent evolution. the causal link is there  but is attributable to common selection pressures rather than common ancestors. 
　in fact  the attribution of observed similarities to specific causes  such as convergent evolution  often amounts to choosing one of a small  fixed set of labels  determined by the nature of the regularity  and by prior knowledge of the domain. in biology  structural similarity may be attributed to common descent  convergent evolution  or imitation of one form by another. in linguistics  words may be similar across languages by common linguistic descent  or later borrowing or intermixing. in geology  the curvature of parallel sedimentary beds may be attributed to folding-deformation of a shape that originally resembled a layer cake or draping-deposition on top of a pre-existing bump  like snow burying a tree stump. exactly the same discovery/labeling pattern can be seen in surface perception  although of course the labels are different. we will give some examples in the next section. 
　relationships such as parallelism and symmetry are ubiquitous. their significance therefore depends little on details of the domain. on the other hand  because they arise for so many diverse reasons  few specific conclusions about the generating process can be drawn on their evidence alone. however  there are many examples of transforms derived from more specialized domain knowledge. like parallelism  these are extremely unlikely to arise by chance  and so supply the same kind of causal link. however  since they rest on very particular properties of the domain  their presence can usually be explained in only one way. an example from linguistics is the systematic phonological shifting that occurs as languages evolve. where two languages can be related by these transformations  there is only one explanation  divergence from a common ancestor; and the details of the observed transformations can give an accurate picture of the drifting process and the common ancestor. again  we will see in the next section that special transformations  such as projection  play a similar role in vision. 
　finally  of the problems we have mentioned  geological interpretation bears especially on perceptual organization: geological structures are contiguous spatial entities  and the data may often be literal pictures  e.g. cross-section views. although the reasoning process may ultimately become 
a. witkin and j. tenenbaum 1 

figure 1. parallel lines may be labeled in several ways. 
here  different labelings have been forced by disambiguating context. 
abstract and deliberate  the basic regularities are provided in large measure directly by perceptual organization-the parallel bands of sedimentation  the curvature of folding  the edges of faults and unconformities  etc. in this case and many others  the process of discovering similarities for high-level explanation isn't just like perceptual organization; it is perceptual organization. 
1. 	surface perception 
　in this section we will draw some parallels between basic surface perception and the high-level problems discussed above. 
　first  the distinction between discovery of regularity and attribution or labeling is widespread in vision as well. our perception of a set of parallel lines may flip between wavy lines on a flat surface  lines ruled on a wavy surface  and a curved cylinder  modulated by bits of context  see fig. 1   just as curved parallel lines may signify folding or draping in geology. edges  another product of perceptual organization  also admit a small set of labels  1 . if we label a bright spot as a highlight  then we label the coherent form on which it lies as a glossy surface  rather than a matte one . reducing our explanations to such lists of idealized options appears to be a useful simplification in vision  just as it is in other domains. mistaking a shadow for a surface boundary is just like mistaking a dolphin for a fish. 
　second  we saw that specialized transformations- e.g. phonological ones-may reveal new  unobvious regularities. discovering these regularities  and observing the parameters of the transformations that revealed them  may impart very specific information about the generat1 a. witkin and j. tenenbaum 
ing process. in vision  of course  the most obvious examples of such transformations are provided by the laws of photometry and projective geometry. specialized as they are  these laws are always with us. 
　much recent work in computational vision has been aimed at recovering quantitative three-dimensional information. in general  models of the imaging process have assumed center-stage. the constraints these models give are underdetermined: all recovery techniques have taken up the slack by imposing a variety of continuity or smoothness constraints and domain restrictions  e.g. of planarity  constant reflectance  etc.  however  we can now provide a very different and more satisfying view of three-dimensional recovery: the basic regularities we have discussed-parallelism  colinearity  etc.  are inherently neither two nor three dimensional. we may seek those regularities in the two-dimensional image  and build our skeletal explanations in 1-space. however  concatenating these general transformations with the specialized ones of projection and photometry defines a broader set of potential regularities  just as the imposition of phonological laws does. in effect  by applying these transformations in reverse to the image  we generate the set of three-dimensional configurations consistent with the image  then search for the same basic regularities in that expanded space. when we discover them  the non-accidentalness argument and its consequences apply just as in two dimensions. the threedimensional structure is recovered  almost as a byproduct  from the particular reverse projection through which the regularity was found. we may thus reverse the usual emphasis  viewing three-dimensional recovery as simply falling out of perceptual organization  when organization is augmented by the special transformations of photometry and projection. 
　some existing work illustrates the merit of this view in special cases  where regularities are invisible in the image  being revealed only through reverse projection: the structure of random-dot stereograms exists only through stereopsis . seemingly chaotic motion in the image may become regular rigid motion  if the regularity is sought in three dimensions rather than two  ll . regularity of texture  or contour  may be sought in three dimensions to infer surface shape. although in these instances depth and shape are recovered by seeking regularity through reverse projection  the unified view of shape recovery as perceptual organization in three-dimensions has not been generally recognized. 
1. 	conclusions 
　elevating perceptual organization from the role of description to that of discovery and explanation radically alters our view of primitive perception: at the very earliest levels  we are creating primitive skeletal explanations based on the discovery of non-accidental similarities. as our interpretations deepen  these primitive models are labeled  elaborated  refined  and disambiguated  but never discarded. the search for regularity in three dimensions is no different in principle than in two  once we are in possession of the special transformations that relate images to scenes. in a reversal of the usual emphasis  we view the recovery of three-dimensional structure as a byproduct of the discovery of regularities in the expanded space these transformations define. 
　we've also suggested that primitive perception is intelligence in microcosm: the methods and principles of discovery and explanation appear on the face of it to be much the same. discovering an edge  then deciding that it is a shadow rather than a surface boundary is much like discovering the structural resemblance between dolphins and fishes  then attributing the similarity to convergent evolution rather than common descent. using projective geometry to discover 1d rigid motion that superficially appears chaotic is much like using phonological laws to discover nonobvious systematic relations among languages: in both cases specific information is derived by observing the parameters of the transformations through which the regularity was found. 
　it should be clear that this brief paper is just a snapshot  passing over many significant issues entirely  touching others only lightly. all of them expand into deep and rich areas for investigation. in our own research we are focusing on the language and rules of spatiotemporal organization  closely guided by our understanding of the purpose of organization. more generally  we hope that this view of organization will foster interest in the area and provide guidance for the more detailed study of its principles and mechanisms. we hope as well that the hints of deep commonalities between the lowest levels of perception and the highest levels of cognition will contribute to bridging the gulf that has unfortunately separated these fields. 
