digital rights management  drm  technology ensures protection of rights on distributed music over the internet. existing drm systems emphasize the protection on businessto-consumer  b1c  distribution model  but pay very little attention on the protection of consumer-to-consumer  c1c  distribution model - referring to peer-to-peer sharing. in this paper  we propose a license management model to support not only the music distributor to consumer  b1c  music distribution  but also consumer-to-consumer music sharing. the proposed license management model consists of two types of license; namely official license and peer license. we proposed to implement these licenses using xrml. 
keywords 
electronic commerce  digital rights management  peer-to-peer sharing  and digital music distribution. 
1. introduction 
facing the opportunities and challenges of digital music distribution  digital music providers  on one hand  require a system for protecting the digital rights of their distributed digital music and they  on the other hand  expect revenues from the music distribution business. digital rights management  drm  could be a desirable solution toward this direction. drm refers to the process of honoring those copyright provisions  license terms and usage agreements established by the owners of the intellectual property . a complete digital rights management solution allows digital content providers to 1. set and keep track of the operations on digital content  whether it is viewed  printed  copied  or passed along to someone else; 1. make transactions on the content  set conditions for granting access and accepting payment for content; and 1. extend to those transactions  how many times it can be viewed  or printed  or for how long  etc  unfortunately  existing drm systems enforce rights protection on the b1c distribution model  from music distributor to consumer   but not c1c distribution model  from consumer to consumer  also referring to peer-to-peering  p1p  sharing. in addressing this problem  it is noted that an appropriate license management model can resolve this issue. in this research study  we first identify common music sharing models and then propose a peer-to-peer license management model for these sharing models. 
1. the proposed license management model 
by observing consumer behavior in the traditional cds and online digital music markets  we identify three common c1c or p1p music sharing models; 1. superdistribution 1. transfer of ownership and 1.rental. many existing drm systems  1  1  1  1  1  are designed for business-to-consumer distribution model. however  drm systems for c1c or p1p sharing activities have not been extensively explored. since these sharing activities mainly require transfer of ownership  usage authorization and so on  an appropriate license management model in drm system could enable c1c or p1p with digital rights management. in this section  we propose a license management model to provide digital rights management in c1c or p1p sharing domain. 
1 overview  

figure 1: the p1p enabled license management model. 
the overview of the proposed license management model is shown in figure 1. this model is based on the enhanced license management model . the model contains two types of service center; external and local. an external drm service center  esc  contains an external license database and a consumer database  while the local drm service center  lsc  contains a local license database and a peer-user database. they both are responsible for license management operations. the esc is responsible for consumer registration  payment and license issuing processes when a consumer requests a license for the music file purchased from content distributor or received via superdistribution channel. the esc stores copies of issued licenses and user's information in the external license and consumer databases. the lsc functions like a small-scaled and simplified version of esc. it is responsible for licensing music in peer-to-peer distribution model  and it stores licenses and information about the peer users in the local license and peeruser databases. in the proposed license management model  there are three different distribution channels for music distribution  1. superdistribution channel  1. peer-to-peer distribution channel  and 1. content distributor channel. the superdistribution channel will be involved in the distribution process that a consumer distributes a purchased music file to another user. the peer-to-peer distribution channel is used when a consumer loans a digital music or transfers the ownership of music to another user. lastly  the content distributor channel is used when a consumer purchases digital music.  
1 digital license 
according to functions of drm  usage and distribution of digital music are subject to the terms and conditions stated in the digital license. a digital license in general contains the information about the consumer  distributor and transaction. it also contains the usage rules and the key to play the music. in the proposed model  extensible rights markup language  xrml  is used in intermediate digital license file that defines the usage rights about the distributed music. the intermediate digital license file is issued by one drm service center and then transferred to another drm service center. there are two types of digital license in our license management model. they are  official license  and  peer license . the formation and data structure of both official license and peer license are the same. the only difference is where they are issued. the official license facilitates b1c distribution model  while the peer license assists c1c distribution model. the official license is issued by an esc at the distributor side to a consumer  and it is stored on the local license database at the consumer side. this official license is only used when a consumer requests a license for digital music either purchased from the distributor or received via the superdistribution channel. the peer license is issued for digital music to be loaned to  or rented by another user. the peer license in principle is used for music distribution from one user to another user - peer-to-peer sharing. technically  the peer license is generated by the lsc from which the digital music originally is  to the lsc at the receiving end. the peer license can be further classified into two kinds; they are  peer-rental license  and  peer-redistribution license . the peer-rental license grants the recipient with the rights to play digital music  but not to transfer his rights to another user. on the other hand  the peer-redistribution license grants the recipient with the rights to transfer the ownership of digital music to anyone.  
1 license acquisition process 
the esc is responsible for handling digital license requested by consumers who attempt to play a newly purchased or downloaded digital music from the distributor website or the superdistribution channel. the esc will first validate the consumer identity by checking the consumer id from the consumer database. if the consumer is not identified  he or she must register to the esc. consumers are required to provide registration information and the registration information will be kept in the consumer database at the esc. after the identification process  an official license will be generated with the information about the digital music  consumer  transaction and the key to play the music. the official license will be encrypted with the consumer public key and then transferred to the consumer. beside  the information such as the digital music  the recipient of the license  the consumer who requests for the license  the key to play the music  the issuing date of the license  and the expiration date of the license is updated to the license database at the esc. when the lsc on the consumer machine received the official license  it will decrypt the official license by the consumer private key and store the information in the local license database. the lsc is mainly responsible for c1c distribution model - a peer-to-peer sharing. it generates peer license for the digital music which is being loaned to  rented by another user  or whose ownership is being transferred. for example  consumer b wants to rent a digital music from consumer a  acting as a third-party distributor . if consumer a accepts the  rental  request  the lsc at the consumer a's local pc will initiate the license acquisition process by generating a peer-rental license and then transferring it to the lsc at the consumer b's local pc.  
the license acquisition process for peer license is similar to the official license. the lsc at consumer b  lsc-b  first sends a peer license request to the lsc at consumer a  lsc-a . the lsc-a will first verify the identity of consumer a. consumer b's identity will be checked as well. if consumer b is not a 
registered peer user of consumer a; it means there is no record in the peer-user database at lsc-a  consumer b needs to register with lsc-a. lsc-a will then add consumer b to the peer-user database. then lsc-a will check the local license database for a valid official license for the digital music that consumer b wants to rent/loan. if the official license is absent  it will check for a valid peer-redistribution license. if both the official license and the peer-redistribution license are absent  the license acquisition process will terminate. if the official license exists in the license database of lsc-a  a valid peerrental license will be generated. the peer-rental license will be saved in the license database of lsc-a  and then delivered to the license database at lsc-b. since then  consumer a is not able to access the digital music  as his rights to access the digital music have been suspended due to the generation of the peer-rental license for consumer b. for the case of transfer of ownership  the license generation process is similar as before  but a peer-redistribution license will be generated instead of the peer-rental license. 
a prototype based on media rights manager was built to evaluate the overall performance of the license management model for peer-to-peer sharing activities. further research will be conducted to study the security issues of the licensing process. 
1. acknowledgement 
this research is supported in part by industrial support fund of hong kong  af/1   and the hong kong research grants council through a direct allocation grant  dag1.bm1 . 
