web applications are growing in demand  complexity and size  thus making it difficult to systematically design and maintain general web applications. to aid in fulfilling these difficult tasks  we present an effective ide tool to allow the design of web applications at a conceptual level based on a web modeling approach - the webml with its modeling specifications written in the platform-independent xml. in addition  we proposed a library of templates for different components in our ide tool to facilitate reuses and maintenance. besides  we studied how structural design of web applications could possibly be improved with easy-to-use features in our ide prototype. clearly  this ongoing work opens up many exciting directions for future investigation. 
keywords 
web design methodologies  ide tool  component-based approach  markup language. 
1. introduction 
nowadays  there are tremendous demands for web applications to deliver highly complicated  dynamic and interactive services to users  thus making the web design and maintenance processes extremely difficult to manage. on the other hand  most popular web technologies such as the microsoft active server pages  asp   java server pages  jsp  and allaire's coldfusion all aimed at providing frequently needed functionalities  e.g. database queries  displaying dynamic information in a certain layout specified by user  to cut down the implementation time. however  as in many other large-scale software projects  the main challenge often lies in capturing all the requirements to form a concise and precise design for the subsequent implementation  testing and maintenance phrases. 
there were different web modeling approaches proposed. due to the close linkage of web applications with hypermedia  earlier web modeling approaches were based on hypermedia concepts. later  it was found that modern software engineering approaches and models could readily be deployed to model most complex and dynamic web applications. for instance   conallen  proposed an extension of uml for web application design. a web application is simply considered to be a special type of a client/server application for which conallen proposed a new set of uml classes and association stereotypes to model web applications. accordingly  a web page is modeled to contain logical components that are executed either on the client  java applets  activex controls  etc  or the server side  database objects  server pages . however  conallen's proposal tends to focus on the lower-level implementation detail and does not capture the high-level conceptual design. besides  the webcomposition model  is built based on the object-oriented  oo  conceptual model to represent web entities of any granularity such as a cgi script  a web page  and so on as component objects. unfortunately  the webcomposition model does not describe the run-time operation of any web application.   lastly  the araneus project  models a web application by adopting a database-centric process. it consists of two conceptual models  a data model called araneus data model  adm  and a web navigation model called navigation conceptual model  ncm . however  
araneus does not address the issue of presentation design. 
in this paper  we focus on developing an ide tool to support and possibly improve on one of the most complete web modeling approaches so as to alleviate the complex tasks of web design and maintenance. based on the webml  modeling approach  we implemented a prototype of the ide tool to support the design of most web components described in the framework. furthermore  we highlighted two possible areas for further improvement to encourage reuse of standard components and systematic process for structural design. clearly  this ongoing research project opens up many interesting directions for further investigation.  
1. webml - a component-based design approach 
the webml  is basically a component-based  high-level and platform-independent design approach with its specifications associated with a graphical representation and the extended markup language  xml  syntax. as a markup specification language to design ways of describing information  xml is chosen since it has become the w1c recommendation and will very likely dominate most web applications in the future. the specifications of webml cover four different views: the involved data content  structural model   the web pages that compose the web application  composition model   the links between the pages  navigation model   the layout for presentation of pages  presentation model  and the customization for one-to-one delivery  personalization model . a tool suite called toriisoft to implement webml has been 
planned yet delayed for delivery. in this research project  our main interest is to learn from our experience to improve the webml approach rather than purely implementing webml. nevertheless  for our subsequent discussion  the 1 models supported in webml are given as follows. 
1 structural model  
the structural model expresses the content of the application  in terms of the entities and relationships. entities have attributes  with an associated data type. properties with multiple occurrences are described using components. to certain extent  it is quite similar to the entity-relationship  e-r  model widely used in database design. cardinality constraints are also given. for detail  refer to . 
1 composition model 
the composition model states what are the pages in the web applications and how what content units form each page. there are six different types of units  namely the data  multidata  index  scroller  filter and direct units. the roles of these units should be obvious from their names. due to space limit  readers should refer to  for a detailed description of all these units.  
1 navigation model 
the navigation model illustrates the navigation links between pages and content units to form the hypertext. there are two types of links. the first type is a non-contextual link that connects up independent pages. the second type is a contextual link that will display the content of the destination unit based on the content of the source unit. contextual links are based on the relationships associated between the entities specified in the structural model. 
1 presentation model 
the presentation model identifies how a page  as defined in the composition model  will appear to the end-user. a style sheet specifies how the pages are layout and the content elements to be inserted into each layout. there are two types of presentation stated in the paper. the first type is page-specific presentation  which dictates the presentation for a specific page only. the second type is generic presentation  which applies to all generic pages. 
1 personalization model 
the personalization model allows the definition of content or presentation based on user-specific profile. two methods of personalization are described. the first method is called declarative personalization  which defines the personalization based on user-specific data predefined in two entities called user and group. the second method is called procedural personalization  which allows specification of business rules. the business rules state what event is to be monitored  the precondition to check when the event occurs and finally the action to be taken if the pre-condition is satisfied. 
1. our proposed modifications 
we built the prototype implementation of an ide tool to support the webml design process using the microsoft active server pages  asp  approach. in addition  we proposed the following modifications to possibly improve the original webml approach at least in the following two aspects.  
1 structural analysis 
the structural model defined in webml appears to be the most critical and important stage in modeling a web application. this is due to the fact that the structural model reflects all the data content of the web application. the hypertext model  consisting of composition and navigation models  could be easily created from the structural model. in webml  there is no specification of a procedure on how to derive the structural model. it is up to the designer's competence to design the structural model as complete and accurate as possible. this can pose a major problem if the designer is does not have a good knowledge and experience. therefore  we proposed the following 1-step structural analysis approach to assist the designer in building a more complete structural model as follows. 
1  identify all the users that will be using a certain part of the web application. 
1  identify all the elements of information that the users are interested in.  
1  identify relationships for each element. these relationships correspond to that of the relationships between entities. 
1 reuse  
reuse is an important issue in hypermedia development. this is because reuse can increase productivity  software reliability and maintainability. accordingly  we suggested to provide a reuse repository that store templates and models that could be reused in webml. it should be noted that only some generic models for certain application domains are chosen to support reuse since there are some models that are too specific to be reused. 
1. ongoing work 
the following are the interesting directions we are investigating at the moment: 
  extending our current ide tool with more easy-to-use features  and apply it to model different applications; 
  investigating to build more high-level design on top of the existing webml approach to support more complicated or large-scale web applications. 
 
1. acknowledgments 
we are grateful to prof. kozo sugiyama and a/p c.h. chi for their fruitful discussion and useful pointers. 
