we present a web-based management tool for health care services with appointment required. this tool lets patients request appointments with doctors and specialists via the internet. it changes the previous situation where the only way to get an appointment was via a telephone call. now  with the new system  it is possible to use a desktop computer or a wapenabled cellular phone to request appointments for health care services. additionally  the system eases daily work to doctors and administrative staff  reducing previous paper work significantly and improving the whole service. according to the users  transparency  flexibility and availability are the main advantages of the new system. 
keywords 
web applications  novel applications  health care service  www/wap  multi-access  user interfaces. 
1. introduction 
currently  internet technologies are widely used all over the world. almost every aspect of our daily life is affected  and usually improved  by the use of the www. nevertheless  this is not the case for the public national health care system in spain. the spanish health care system  with a total budget of 1 millions of euros  is continually taking advantage of new technology improvements  for example  the telemedicine. this year  more than 1 million euros of the spanish national budget has been dedicated to support public hospitals and medical centers. nevertheless  this policy  which has been maintained by different governments since 1's  had no effect up till now in the incorporation of the www based services for the end user  in this case  the patient. the spanish health care system www site  is composed of a set of static pages that only provide general information about the services offered  geographical location for several centers  etc. 
in this paper  we present the first experience of the use of www technologies to offer an appointment service for the spanish national health care system. patients access through the web to get and appointment with their doctor  who can consult his workload or request a specialist doctor appointment for the patient. both computer desktops and wap-enabled  cell phones can be used. administration duties for the whole system  which is geographically distributed  can also be carried out through a desktop computer using a web interface. security to protect patients' privacy is handled using ssl  and wtls . 
 
 
1. a www/wap-based solution 
we implemented a www-based management tool for health care services with appointment required. this tool is used by patients to request an appointment with their doctors and make later modifications if needed. it is important to stand out that the implementation that was carried out maintains the current appointment service by telephone calls integrated with the new one. in fact  there are three different possibilities to get an appointment with the doctor: 
1. a telephone call to an appointment center. administrative staff at this center use a web interface to manage requests from patients.  
1. web-based request through a desktop computer. in this case  a web browser is used to support the appointment request.  
1. wap-enabled cell phone. using the mobile phone it is possible to request or modify an appointment with the doctor.  
anyway  there is a centralized database where all information is stored and  even for the first case  the process has been completely computerized. in fact  the web interface used by the administrative staff at the new appointment center has been proved as a very easy-to-use from the experience recorded so far. 
we believed it was important to maintain the three interfaces. the telephone call system represents the traditional system. it is essential because there is still an important percentage of the population in spain that does not have internet access. this is especially true for elderly people  who  by the way  are an important group of users for health care services. 
the web browser interface  c.f. figure 1  has been actively used during the last months. it provides a very easy-to-use tool that makes it very quick to get an appointment. internet users are now estimated in 1 million people in spain  that is a 1 % of the whole population. in 1  there were only 1 internet users. numbers are increasing exponentially. with the recent adoption of a plain tariff of 1 euros per month  it is expected that during the year 1 the number of users will be increased over 1%. 
there are 1 million mobile cell phones in spain. after the 1 christmas sales and for the first time  this number surpassed the number of cable phones at office or home locations. cell phones will outnumber pcs sometime around 1. although there are not too many wap-enabled mobile telephones at present  by 1  there will be internet-enabled mobile devices in 1 million cars  1 million homes and countless other non office locations all over the world. moreover the third generation  1g  cell phone standard promises to bring ubiquity to the global mobile telephone industry and increase the bandwidth to 1 mbps. taking these facts in mind  it seems quite reasonable  if not essential  to provide a cell phone interface to access the service  c.f. figure 1 . 
 
figure 1: selection of appointment slot 
doctors are provided with both a wap and www interface to access the following services: consult their assigned workload  manage patients' records and request referrals to specialists. administrative staff is provided with a web interface on a desktop computer to manage all data stored in a centralized database. they are responsible for tasks like registering new doctors or patients  set up every doctor's schedule and slot characteristics  move patients from their health care center to a 
new one  etc. 
 
figure 1: wap interface on a nokia's 1 
1. advantages over the previous system 
from the patient point of view  the introduction of the new system offers: 
1. transparency. the appointment request is managed by the patient by himself  who is allowed to access all the information about his doctor availability. therefore  previous confusion on the mechanism that generated so 
 
long waiting queues is now clarified. the health care service's willingness to disclose information has been reflected in the information offered to the end user.  
1. efficiency. there are no long phone waiting times at busy hours. both the internet and cell phone interfaces offer an always available appointment service. typical service times range from 1 to 1 minutes depending on network delays. previous studies showed that service time reached 1 minutes at rush hours. moreover  appointments with a specialist are more agile since  with the new system  the referrals are directly requested by the family doctor and confirmed by the system automatically.  
1. availability. the new service is offered 1 hours per day  1 days per year. there are no office hours never again.  
benefits for the health care system are twofold: firstly  the image offered to its users has been improved  secondly  the new system implies financial savings. administrative staff needed to maintain the appointment service is reduced. 
data is now gathered around an integrated service that eases patient movements among health centers  change of assigned doctors  management of patient records  etc. 
1. conclusions 
the previous situation in the public health care system regarding the appointment telephone call centers made it essential to reduce waiting times and system availability. the tool presented in this paper brought a new appointment system to the galician public health services. while keeping the previous system  which was essential to cope with the habits of many people  especially the elderly  two new possibilities were offered: access through a web browser and wap-enabled cell phones.  
drawbacks are mainly related to the fact that some users were reluctant to change the previous system they were used to  despite of its disadvantages. this was the reason to maintain a telephone call center integrated with the new system. also  there are not enough computers in the local health centers to allow every doctor to use the new system. the same computer must be used by several doctors making it difficult to take full advantage of it  for example  doctors have to share the same computer to access patients' records or request appointments with specialists . we hope this situation will change in a near future. in fact  the success of the new appointment service is encouraging galician politicians to invest more on web technologies. 
1. acknowledgements 
we want to thank alfonso villar and juan veiga for their contribution to this work. 
