a web media agent is presented  which can make a user's web surfing experience more productive. once the user visits a web page  semantic descriptions of the media objects on the page are automatically collected and used as their semantic indexes  which can help the user quickly find relevant media objects later.
keywords
multimedia information retrieval  web information retrieval  web experience  media agent  www
1. introduction
the popularity of multimedia data  including video/audio clips  images  and other documents  is rapidly increasing due to improving multimedia technologies and convenient availability facilitated by the internet. however  how to manage/utilize these multimedia data is non-trivial. among other issues  how to find multimedia data that are relevant to users' intents is one of the most difficult problems.
although people have invented some content-based media search approaches   they are currently at very low performance level. the best way to search multimedia documents is still by their semantics  which is usually represented by some natural language text descriptions. hence  semantic indexing of these multimedia data by text descriptions is critical for later search.
fortunately  as the world wide web has now become a rich source of multimedia data  it is very common that  on many web pages  the text content  e.g.  alt text  anchor text  and surrounding text  is semantically related to the media objects on the same pages to some extent  and can therefore be used to describe the semantics of these media objects. there are already quite a few papers  that have taken advantages of the relevancy of surrounding text and embedded images to do semantics-based retrieval of web images.
based on the above observation  we have invented an agent-like system  which can  on behalf of a specific user  automatically collect the semantics of web media objects when the user accesses them. the collected semantics are used to index media objects and facilitate later retrieval. hence  the web media agent makes the user's web surfing experience more productive. furthermore  the agent can also provides other kinds of assistances in using these media objects  as we present in the rest of this paper.
1. the web media agent system
the architecture of the web media agent is shown in figure 1. there are six components in the web media agent: the agent trigger  the semantics collection module  the feature extraction/indexing module  the media search engine  the suggestion module  ui   and the learning module.
the trigger is used to monitor users' actions and activate the media agent when necessary. the actions that may trigger the media agent include visiting a url or saving/downloading a media object file from the web.
the collection module is used to collect the media objects' urls and related text information from the web. when the user accesses some media objects  the media agent collects their urls and their semantic descriptions and stores them in the media database. the semantic descriptions are text information on the same web pages containing the media objects. potential sources of these semantic descriptions include the alternative text  alt tag   the anchor text  the page titles  urls  filenames  and surrounding text  etc.
the feature extraction and indexing module then extracts suitable semantic features from the text information and index the media objects using these features. the text information obtained as potential semantics descriptions is usually in some coarse form containing much redundant information. some semantic features  which are concise keywords representing the semantics of the original text information  have to be extracted. these semantic features are used to index these media objects for quick retrieval in later re-use.
the media search engine is used to find relevant media objects according to the query  which is either explicitly specified by the user or automatically guessed by the media agent. the search engine uses a matching algorithm to find out the most relevant media objects that match to the user's need represented by the query. in the matching algorithm of our experiment  we calculate the semantic similarity between the query and each media object in the media database. the semantic similarity is calculated using the dot product of the query's semantic feature vector and the media object's semantic feature vector.

figure 1. architecture of the web media agent system.
the suggestion module is used to show the search result to the user in a ranked list given by the search engine for the user to make decisions. the retrieved media objects are sorted by their semantic similarity to the query. each object is displayed with a short paragraph of text or a few keywords to describe its semantics. the user may choose some from the list. the user may also be able to modify the semantic descriptions of the media objects. there is another suggestion case in the web media agent. when the user wants to save or download a media object from the web  the web media agent is able to provide a
set of suggested filenames according to the semantic feature of the media object. the user can choose one from them  and if necessary  modify it a little bit  and use it as the filename of the saved media object on the local machine. this scenario is exemplified by the  save as  advisor  as we show in the experiments in the next section.
when the user selects and accepts one or more of the suggestions  the learning module will automatically update the semantic indexing of the media objects. the media agent is also able to learn from the user's response to the suggestions and update the semantic features accordingly. the learning ability is a very important aspect of the intelligence of the media agent. for instance  the modified filename is probably the most relevant keyword s  in the semantic feature and therefore should be assigned with a much higher weight. the chosen media object among the retrieval results is also considered very relevant to the query. hence  the query should also take a higher weight in the semantic feature of the chosen media object. since the web media agent has collected all media objects the user has accessed  they reveal to some extent the user's habitual actions and favorites. hence  an offline crawler may be activated at the system idle time to search the web for those media objects relevant to the user's favorites and to collect their urls and semantic features into the media database.
1. experiments and evaluations
we have built a baseline configuration of the wed media agent system by implementing key ideas presented in this paper  including media object collection  retrieval  and suggestion. we only handle html  jpeg  gif  and mp1 files in the current system  though we can also extend the system to handle other forms of media files. in this section  presents experiments and evaluations of two main modules that can show the effectiveness of the web media agents. they are the  save as  advisor and the  media player  reminder.
the  save as  advisor is activated when a user wants to save/download a media object from a web page. the  save as  advisor automatically collects and extracts some keywords from the web page and suggests a list of concise and precise filenames for the user to select. in the meantime  the semantic feature of the media object is also saved into the local database. the  media player  reminder is used to help the user to locate the media objects that have been used before. the user only needs to submit a few related keywords to the  media player  reminder  rather than to remember the exact location on the local disk or the url on the web.
in order to test the efficacy and efficiency of the web media agent  we have used the  save as  advisor to download some media objects  including some mp1  html  wav  and jpeg files from the web. about 1 media files are collected from 1 web sites. the media agent extracts all the related semantic features  including filenames  surrounding text  page titles  hyperlinks  etc.  and then indexes these media objects with these features. we have calculated the statistics of the suggestion accuracy  based on the users' subjective judgment  of the  save as  advisor. the accuracy of the top 1 suggestion is nearly 1% and the accuracy of top 1 suggestions is as high as nearly 1%  as shown in figure 1.

figure 1. accuracy of the  save as  advisor's suggestions.
it is difficult for us to calculate the recall of the search engine of the media agent because it is a tedious job to browse the entire media database and specify the ground truth manually. therefore  we only choose 1 queries to demonstrate the performance of the  media player  reminder. the average precision-recall is fairly good with two representative pairs being  1  1  and  1  1   approximately.
1. concluding remarks
in this paper  we have presented the web media agent  which is an intelligent system to automatically collect semantic descriptions of multimedia data on behalf of users whenever and wherever they access these multimedia data from the web and provide necessary suggestions when users want to use these multimedia data again. as we show in the experiments  the web media agent is effective in gathering relevant semantics for media objects and is able to help users to quickly find relevant media objects.
