since june 1  ukoln has worked with the royal national institute for the blind  the national library for the blind and an independent library consultant on a major project  reveal  that is part of an initiative to improve library and information services to visually impaired people in the uk. reveal will be a webbased resource that will provide quick and easy access to information on the range of material available to visually impaired people. progress on the project to date is described.
keywords
web-based union databases  collection description  web accessibility  services to visually impaired people.
1. introduction
visually impaired people need a range of materials to carry on reading. they might need their daily newspaper on tape; the latest blockbuster novel in braille or moon; online reference material; or a children's book using pictures  print and braille to allow them to share their reading experience with a sighted person; or any combination of these. in the uk  more than 1 separate specialist organizations transcribe material from standard print into other media. with so many organizations and media formats  it is necessary to have a single  easy to use source of information on which titles are available in which formats.
1. background
the royal national institute for the blind  rnib  developed the national union catalogue of alternative formats  nucaf  as a first response to this need. initially the service was only available via rnib but access was then extended through regional library systems' union catalogues.
then in 1  a programme of work funded by the department of culture  media and sport through the library and information commission working with share the vision was set up. project one was concerned with developing nucaf; this included a review of its role  a specification of metadata requirements and an audit of its coverage.
1. investigation
ukoln carried out a comprehensive review of the aims  objectives and role of nucaf. the review concluded that a union database was the key element in improving access  but that nucaf in its current form could not deliver at the required level. despite efforts to widen access  nucaf remained available to end users only through intermediaries such as rnib  library inter-lending sections and a few schools and colleges and its visibility as a resource was low.
in addition  it was known that a number of organizations either had none  or only some  of their holdings on nucaf. indeed  the audit carried out by rnib  the national library for the blind  nlb  and juliet leeves  demonstrated that nearly as many available titles were unrecorded as were actually recorded on nucaf. additionally  records needed to be enhanced with additional information to assist users choosing items remotely.
the strategic review  was submitted in december 1 and recommended that nucaf should be made completely accessible and comprehensive. in order to achieve this  the union database would be moved to a new  web-accessible system and would be re-launched as reveal. there were also recommendations for some additional resources such as a webbased collections register. the programme steering group accepted the recommendations and the project was given a high priority rating in the next phase of the programme of work.
1. the feasibility study
a grant from the british library cooperation and partnership programme enabled work to proceed on the next stage  a feasibility study. work began in may 1 with a team from nlb  rnib  ukoln and juliet leeves. the study covered three areas: a service specification and management structure  an operational feasibility review  and an outline business plan. further development was divided into a number of work packages  in order to facilitate further work as and when further funding became available. a report  was submitted in september 1. some work detailed in the report is now being funded - the development of the collections register and the appointment of a reveal project manager - and it is hoped that funding will become available shortly for further work.
1. what is reveal 
the reveal union database will be designed from the outset with the needs of visually impaired users in mind  in terms of choice of routes to the information  records with enhanced data that enable users to make choices based on relevant information  and web content accessibility.
1 a web resource
the union database will be held on a system with a web frontend. this will allow users to access the database from home  place of study  or any publicly accessible internet access  such as public libraries or cyber cafes. although internet access is widening  it is not universal  excluding some users. to support them  a cd product is planned; this could be used in mobile libraries  schools where internet connections may be limited in number  in hospital wards  or for individuals who have a pc but not an internet connection.
1 supporting users
reveal is committed to using relevant national and international standards so will be using marc1 bibliographic record format  library of congress subject headings  lcsh  and guidelines for subject access to works of fiction and drama  gsafd  for fiction indexing and genre headings.
records will contain short summaries on the content of a title. users will be able to search on the names of major characters that appear in a series of novels  or for the series itself. they will be able to search for fiction titles that focus on specific issues  such as bullying  or family relationships  environmental issues or depicting life in another country.
details will be given of the range of formats each work has been transcribed into  whether tactile  audio  enlarged print or electronic. records will also indicate which organization holds copies of each format of a title.
initially the database will cover fiction and non-fiction texts and music scores that have been transcribed into an accessible format. there are also plans for the inclusion of tactile maps and diagrams at a later stage.
1 supporting producers
reveal is also looking at a range of ways in which it can support the specialist organizations that produce the accessible format materials to improve services to users. as only 1% of titles published each year in the uk are transcribed into another format  a union database will enable producers to check whether a title has already been transcribed in the format they were considering. this will give them the chance to select another title instead  widening the range available to visually impaired people and reducing duplication of effort. organizations will be offered a range of routes by which they can supply details of new titles  depending on their access to technology  ranging from submission of paper forms  to email and direct entry via a web interface.
1 supporting inter-lending
visually impaired users currently rely heavily on individual membership of the specialist organizations for their reading needs and few have used inter-lending services. with recent moves in the uk to improve inter-lending services for this material  and agreements by some lenders to accept requests by members of other designated organizations  this is set to change over time. reveal will therefore provide an important resource to library inter-lending sections to locate copies of requested titles.
1. the collections register
although there are more than 1 organizations that produce and make available accessible format materials  users often get to know of only a handful through individual recommendations. developing a collections register is the first step in assisting users in their search for materials.
again this will be a web-based resource in order to make it widely accessible. end users will be able to search the register for named collections and for collections with strengths in particular areas. although the initial data collection and input will be carried out centrally  subsequently the specialist organizations will be able to update their own entries online. ukoln has already been carrying out research into collection level descriptions  and will be working on this development.
1. accessibility
in developing reveal  the issue of accessibility is paramount. for too long visually impaired people have had to rely on intermediaries or a variety of lists to discover and locate this information. web-based resources such as the union database and the collections register provide an opportunity for visually impaired people to make their own searches and discover information at first hand.
it is equally important then to design these new resources with accessibility issues in mind  so that no further obstacles are placed in the way of these users. so design of the user frontends of the reveal union database and the collections register will use the advice and guidance found in the web content accessibility guidelines . it will also build on the development of accessible opacs   such as the work going on at nlb and the canadian national institute for the blind.
1. acknowledgements
the team working on the project is grateful for the additional expertise and advice provided by staff at rnib  nlb  and the
british library.
