information retrieval tools and search engines have mainly been leveraging research results and technologies developed for the english language. in this paper we report the issues and obstacles we met in the process of designing and developing a search engine for the indonesian language  as well as our progress and results.  the results include original contributions such as a grammar for stemming indonesian words and a selfimproving language identification algorithm. 
keywords 
indonesian language  search engine  web-crawler  stemming language identification  supervised learning  unsupervised learning.  
1. introduction 
the indonesian language  often referred to as bahasa indonesia  is the official language of the republic of indonesia. although several hundreds regional languages and dialects are used in the republic  the indonesian language is spoken by an estimated 1 million people  not counting an additional 1 million malay speakers who can understand it.  for a nation composed of several thousands islands and for its diasporas of students and professionals  the internet  email  discussion groups  and the web are unprecedented vehicles for cultural exchanges and for the conservation and development of an incomparably rich cultural diversity and identity. yet few effective search engines are available to the indonesian speaker wishing to search the indonesian web. the handful of internet portals providing such a service relies on off-the-shelf technology designed for the american-english language. 
we engaged in the design and development of a search engine for the indonesian web  i.e. the web of documents written in indonesian  with two objectives in mind. on the one hand  naturally  we aim at deploying our search engine. on the other hand  we identify and solve issues pertaining to the design and development of non-english language search tools and to create results of interest for other information retrieval or computational linguistic projects. 
1 search engine architecture 
the search engine is composed of three main units  namely: the web-crawler  the indexing and retrieval modules  and the user interface. the crawler gathers documents across the web. it filters the indonesian documents based on the language identification algorithm we describe in section 1. the indexing module processes the fetched documents:  documents are segmented into words. stop-words are removed. remaining words are stemmed. the resulting terms are used to index the reference of the document  url . queries are processed similarly. 
the retrieval module retrieves a ranked list of possibly relevant documents by comparing the queries with the documents. in the current implementation we use the smart information retrieval system1. although we ultimately aim at implementing our own retrieval engine  it is important to benchmark the other components using a reference test-bed such as smart. the 
information retrieval model used is the vector space model .  
1 segmentation 
the indonesian language has officially adopted roman alphabet. 
the large majority of indonesian documents on the web use the ascii character set. the indonesian language contains almost no diacritics except for some rare words assimilated from foreign languages. dash  -   the numeral two  1   and the square symbol  1  require a special handling. indeed  plurals in indonesian are expressed by repeating the noun  e.g.  bukubuku  = books   where the repeated noun can be adjoined by a dash. however  it is also a common practice to put the number 1 or the square symbol behind the word to denote repetition in writing  e.g.  buku1  or  buku1  . the repeated forms have also evolved to indicate repetitive action  e.g.  jalan-jalan  = walking around  or other miscellaneous meaning  e.g.  matamata = spy . to further complicate the matter  it is common to affix a repeated word or to repeat affixed words. thus  certain mechanism needs to be developed to cater to this language feature. this feature is also the object corresponding stemming rules. 
1 stemming 
the indonesian language is a morphologically rich language. there are around 1 standard affixes  prefixes  suffixes  circumfixes  and some infixes inherited from javanese  listed in . affixes can virtually be attached to any word and they can be iteratively combined. the wide use of affixes seems to have created a trend among indonesian speakers to invent new affixes and affixation rules . we refer to this larger set of affixes  which includes the standard set  as extended. 
there are few implementations of stemming algorithms for the indonesian language. only one of which  from the university of indonesia   was available for comparison. to our knowledge all existing algorithms use a dictionary and implement the standard set of affixes only. 
by defining two sets of grammar rules corresponding to the derivation and inflection laws of indonesian we constructed two algorithms for the stemming of the standard and extended sets of affixes  respectively. our algorithms are based on the morphological rules only without dictionary. 
the performance of our stemming algorithm is comparable to that of the university of indonesia's algorithm  when evaluated using the approach proposed in   i.e. from a computational linguistic point of view. in information retrieval  stemming is used to abstract from the morphological idiosyncrasies and hopefully results in an improvement of the retrieval performance. our experiment with smart showed again a performance of our algorithms comparable to the one of the dictionary-based algorithm. we noticed  however  that the performance increase over retrieval without stemming is only significant for queries involving common nouns and verbs  concepts  rather than proper nouns. as opposed to other morphologically rich languages such as slovene   for which stemming brings a significant improvement of the retrieval performance  affixes in indonesian are used to form derivations  conceptual variations  rather than inflections  grammatical variations . this refines the conclusion of  that the effectiveness of stemming is commensurate to the degree of morphological complexity in that we showed that it also depends on the role of the morphological rules. 
1. identifying indonesian documents 
the indonesian web is not a disconnected component of the world wide web. web pages in indonesian link to documents in english  dutch  arabic  or any other language. as we only wish to index indonesian web pages  a language identification system that can tell whether a given document is written in indonesian or not is needed. according to   language identification for text is a closed problem. methods available yield near perfect performance. among these methods  the most widely accepted are based on n-gram frequency .  however  all these methods differentiate documents from a set of known languages. this setting is unrealistic in the context of the web as one can neither know in advance nor predict the languages to be discriminated. 
1 learning from positive examples only 
we need to devise a language identification algorithm that can learn to distinguish between indonesian and non-indonesian documents from a reference set of indonesian documents only. to put it in the machine learning context  we need an algorithm that learns from positive examples only. the algorithm we devised is based on the frequency of tri-grams in indonesian words. the system first learns from a list of indonesian words. then  a weighted sum evaluates the similitude between the frequencies of the tri-grams in the reference set with those in candidate new document. a notion of penalty is also introduced to weight down tri-grams that have never been seen before. in our experiments we introduced three kinds of penalties. the algorithm achieves a performance of 1% recall and 1%precision. 
1 continuous self-improvement from selflabeled examples 
collecting representative examples and deciding whether they are written in indonesian or not for the initial training are time consuming tasks. since the performance of the system was already very good we decided to try the bold idea of letting it be further iteratively trained by its own decisions.  
we set an experiment with an initial training set of 1 indonesian documents and a moderate penalty  to put the algorithm in mediocre initial and learning conditions . we measure the performance variation after each of 1 iterations. at each iteration  a set of 1 documents  1 indonesian and 1 english  is presented to the algorithm  which would label and learn from the set. after each iteration  the performance of the algorithm is measured against a reference set  1 indonesian  1 english  1 malay  1 tagalog  and 1 german documents.  the performance of the algorithm  in terms of recall and precision  is shown in figure 1. the performance increase confirms the possibility of continuous self-improvement. 

 
figure 1. recall and precision for 1 iterations. 
1. conclusion  
the world wide web is simultaneously an opportunity to foster a synergetic diversity of cultures and a risk to create a tame and dull global culture. we hope that our work and results on information retrieval for the indonesian language can positively and constructively contribute to avoid a cultural and linguistic hegemony on the web.  
