we consider the problem of improving the performance of web access by proposing a reconstruction of the internal link structure of a web site in order to match the quality of the pages  measured in terms of their link importance in the web space  with the popularity of the pages  measured in terms of their importance recognized by web users . we provide a set of simple algorithms in order to increase the access rate of popular pages by using local reorganization of the web site's pages. 
keywords 
hypertext linking  web performance  search engines. 
1. introduction 
search engines index web documents using their own proprietary techniques for web information retrieval. we can summarize the most common functionalities of modern search engines  1 :  i  they use a spider or crawler that traverses the web for fetching new pages to be included into the repository  or just for updating existing data   ii  they use an indexer that helps them do full text indexing of web pages   iii  they provide the user with the ability to add new urls for exploration   iv  they use a ranking mechanism  based on the indexer  for sorting the produced results of a search query. 
recently there have been proposed search engines or research prototypes  see  1 1 1    that follow other criteria on match ordering. these search engines try to exploit the link structure of the web  in order to uncover the importance of a page for a given query topic. the ranking is based on the link interconnection of the web space  which is a significant improvement towards defeating advertising  spammers . in   see also  for a related approach  the link importance of a 
web page is equal to the sum of its in- and out-degree. in  the rank of a page p is computed by a method that incorporates the ranking of pages reachable from p. the google search engine uses a calculated number called pagerank  that is indicative to a web page  in accordance to the whole number of existing web documents.  finally in  the link importance of a page is computed by using a two-way feedback process that distinguishes two kinds of pages: hubs  pages with high quality outgoing links  and authorities  pages with high quality incoming links . 
