keywords: community  latent trend  topics 
1. introduction 
topics sometimes grow into trends absorbing attentions of people. for example  the robot succor games robocup seemed just curious when it appeared first  but matched with latent interests of research-communities  i.e. multi-agents  game simulations  robotics  etc. people from these communities  gathering and seeing each other to discuss in the same context was a novel or rare experience.  following such examples  we present a method  links to the future  for discovering web pages of new topics to attract multiple communities. directions to future creation beneficial for communities can be found  as the effect of the topics obtained and visualized by the system.  
    studies have been devoted to extracting communities from hyperlinks  1 . the method in  obtained hub pages  linking to authority- linked from many pages as ones obtained by google   pages popular to established communities.  obtained cores   groups of densely linked authorities and hubs  for finding emerging communities. on the other hand  our aim is to find premature topics possible to be the seeds of communities not emerging yet. this is for grasping significant yet latent trends  hard to find due to the premature prevalence.  
1. links to the future - the philosophy  
at least two obstacles exist for predicting future trends. the first is the extreme rareness of trend-outbreak signs. if a group of communities often see each other  they would have already evolved into a super-community. prediction methods relying on past frequent patterns  or relatively rare patterns in rich past data  1   are not applicable here. the second is the hidden causes for a trend outbreak  hard to be fully considered as features  data attributes  in data analysis/mining. corresponding to each obstacle  we have two principles for a trend outbreak  see the robocup example again : 
principle 1: popular communities exist  each made of people sharing some popular  authorized/established  interests. 
principle 1: if a new topic attracts different-interest popular communities  it grows into a fashion among  those communities.  
 
1. the method of  links to the future corresponding to principle 1  interest-sharing communities represented by authority-pages or top pages of google are obtained by looking at links to those pages  .  in each community  we regard the highest-ranked page according to google as the archive-page representing the  popular or emerging in the sense of    community.  selecting  a single page from one community here is for a comprehensible visualization of the output as in fig. 1. 
  then  corresponding to principle 1  pages linked from multiple archive-pages but are not in any community are taken as novel topics attracting multiple communities  called agoratopic pages after ancient egyptian inter-community meetings.   that is  an agora-topic is expected to grow into a major concern of a new society greater than existing community obtained above. if people become aware of such an inter-community value of the topic by having people from various communities meet  their communication can lead to an outbreak of the topic.  the algorithm outline for obtaining agora-topics is as follows. 
step 1: a query representing the interest domain is entered to a search engine  google here  obtaining 1 to 1 pages .  
step 1: communities  of pages obtained in step 1  are obtained as in  and archive-pages are selected from communities.  
step 1:  pages  not in the communities but linked from multiple archive-pages  are obtained as agora-pages.   
after the steps here  archive-pages  black nodes   agora-pages  red nodes  and the links between them are visualized as in fig.1. 
1. evaluation 
stage 1. an interest domain is fixed  1 to 1  appropriate number for talking  people relevant to the domain gather  and the domain-name is input as a query  e.g.  information retrieval  . 
stage 1. the output graph adding real and fake red nodes  as if they all were the obtained as agora-pages  is shown to the subjects. that is  some red nodes  not really obtained  were added with red links to black archive-nodes. subjects reported individual impressions and group-wise ideas in discussions. 
we conducted evaluations of the two stages above  for various queries. for query  information retrieval   five subjects engaged in various studies relevant to  information retrieval were tested  varying from master-course students to research associates.  in stage 1  all the 1 black nodes were said to be strongly relevant to all users' backgrounds. on the other hand  all subjects said the red  agora  nodes showed directions of the area on which they might make some decisions for future work. 
 
 
fig.1 the output of links to the future  for domain query  information retrieval    for example  trec  http://trec.nist.gov/  in a red node appealed to their challenging desire to evaluate their original works on a standard target document collection as dealt in the 
trec 	series. 	when 	they 	read 	another 	red 	page 
 http://biodiversity.uno.edu/delta   they thought about starting an inter-desciplinary project as delta  description language for taxonomy - a system for computer processing  including information retrieval  of biological taxonomic descriptions . in fact  delta attracts various of researchers  - the discussion about its development is increasing the variety of discussants as in the mailing list in http://listserv.surfnet.nl/archives/delta-
l.html. black nodes surrounding these red nodes varied across various sub-communities of information retrieval  e.g.  biology and information retrieval people in the case of delta. 
   for all queries including other domains  we had 1 black nodes in total  of which 1 were said to be of established interests in the area.  only 1 black nodes appealed as directions for new decisions for future research. on the other hand  the 1 red nodes included 1  interesting for planning future work  in subjects' individual impressions  with embodied  comments about possible decisions they may make. their discussions lead to awareness on significant new problems  e.g.   what should the quality evaluation of a search engine be  for measuring user's real satisfactions   and  who seeks information retrieval techniques for tasks   through discussing looking at red pages. 
1. conclusion                                           
this paper presented a method for showing web pages to stimulate various communities to communicate and create new interest trends. a human tends to make decisions affected by belonging communities  especially if the decision is novel and one needs to be somehow encouraged for deciding.  the presented method will realize an effective promotion for encouraging people to make such novel activities. 
