we present personal webmelody  a sonified web server that allows customization and full integration of system-generated music with external music source  audio cd  mp1  etc . results of an experiment on the usage of sonification for monitoring web servers are also briefly reported.
1. introduction
size and complexity of world wide web servers are growing and it is important to be able to monitor their behavior. monitoring by using log files is useful for an off-line precise analysis of accesses. but for web servers used as a company asset  for instance  to showcase products and to support webbased commerce  timely monitoring of server behavior and access patterns is critical  as it could very well mean the difference between making money and losing money. thus  it is important to have an effective and efficient way to monitor in real-time the behavior of the server so that prompt action can be taken to fix a malfunctioning server or to fine-tune the system.
in this paper  we present personal webmelody  a sonified web server that allows customization and full integration of system-generated music with external music sources  audio cd  mp1  etc. . as discussed  experiments conducted with the previous version of webmelody  suggest that music can convey peripheral information  efficiently. though it remains to be shown that such system-generated music can indeed be listened to for a long period without inducing mental fatigue in the listener  personal webmelody is meant to minimize such potential limitations by integrating systemgenerated music with personal musical selections. to convey server information  our system indicates server state by changing the volume of the personal music source and by mixing in additional sounds represented by midi tracks.
we believe personal webmelody offers an effective and efficient way for real-time monitoring of the server. by realtime monitoring  we mean that the system provides feedback to the webmaster of a web server event within a short  fixed time interval  ¦Ä. note that  ordinary  log analyzers do not provide such real-time monitoring because they rely on log files that are processed off-line in a variety of ways. even using log-analyzers periodically  e.g.  every hour  has the drawback that information must be explicitly requested by the webmaster. our system solves this problem by pushing a constant flow of information to the administrator about the status of the web server.  though  on the one hand  real-time monitoring ought to be useful and effective because it enables constant awareness of the server's state  on the other  it can only be effective if the user interface is not too intrusive by constantly interrupting the webmaster. because personal webmelody relies on sounds --- music in particular --- to convey information to the webmaster  we believe it is critical to offer the user a choice of musical representations of server behavior.  thus  our system is fully configurable  using customizable sounds to represent server behavior and integrating personal external audio sources.
1. personal webmelody
personal webmelody is based on the same three-level distributed architecture presented in   and is based on the following components: the sonification apache module mod musical log  that intercepts http request/response   the collector server  for buffering and preprocessing   and the webplayer application  which produces audio output based on the tracks  wav or midi  and allows to mix the output with an external audio source  see figure below .

events that can be monitored include load  throughput  and almost any attribute of individual requests and responses. our system is flexible because it can be configured to associate individual or group web server events with specific musical tracks  allowing an administrator to customize and monitor the web server's state.
the main new feature of personal webmelody is that the system can be easily personalized. this is a significant improvement on the impact of the techniques toward webmasters since it is well recognized that personal characteristics of users influence how they hear and feel about the information represented by sounds. to this end  the system also allows the mixing of the sounds generated by the sonification of the server with an external sound source chosen by the user  e.g. mp1 files  audio cd .
1. sonification study
there are two potential problems with providing an administrator with sonic indicators of web server status:  a  sound  especially music  might be so distracting that the administrator's overall productivity drops;  b  specific sounds associated with specific web server events might be difficult to pick out and attend to  especially if the administrator is engaged in other ongoing tasks.  we set out to investigate whether either of these might in fact be problems in practice.
the goal of our study was to explore the effectiveness of our sonified web server in a controlled setting. to determine whether the music played by the sonified server is distracting  whether it is informative  and whether there are tradeoffs between the two  we used a dual-task paradigm in which participants performed a primary text-editing task while at the same time monitoring music that simulated the sonified web server  roughly following the method described in . we measured the degree to which music distracted performance in an editing task  and we measured memorability of musical events in a post-experiment test.
1 methods
twenty-eight science undergraduate students at the university of salerno volunteered to participate.  all were native italian speakers and only one was a trained musician.
we used a 1  editing task/listening task/dual task  x 1  presentation order  design.  presentation order varied between participants  divided in two groups   and task varied within participants.  each participant edited text  correcting simple errors  in two conditions  once with instructions to listen to the background music  emphasis music   and once with instructions not to listen to the music  background music .  in addition  each participant also listened to music without editing  music only .
the materials consisted of three passages for text editing  three sound tracks  one for training  one for the emphasis condition  and one for the background condition   a music questionnaire  for testing the informativeness of sound tracks   and a final questionnaire  participants were asked to rate their reading and musical skills .
soundtracks were designed as a compromise between providing information and being distracting  while at the same time creating pleasant background music. all three soundtracks used improvisational jazz styles to insure that in all cases no melodic sequence would be familiar to the participants.  in addition  jazz style is largely unpredictable  lending itself to representing the spontaneous and unpredictable nature of web server activity.  jazz-like chords have been used effectively to represent several coordinates to be monitored for parallel programs .
the music questionnaire consisted of eleven multiple-choice questions  followed by a table summarizing the associations of sounds with events.
1 results
data were analyzed as follows. first  we performed a 1 x 1 analysis of variance  anova  on the editing data  with the within participants factor background vs. emphasis and the between participants factor presentation order. no effect was obtained for either factor on editing performance; for background vs. emphasis  f 1  1    1  and for group  f 1  1  = 1  p = 1.  overall  the mean number of edits in ten minutes was 1.
second  we performed a 1 x 1 anova on the results of the music test  with the within participants factor music only vs. emphasis and the between participants factor presentation order.  there was no effect of order  f 1  1  = 1  p = 1  but there was main effect of experimental condition  f 1  1  = 1  p   1.  the mean number of correct answers in the music only condition was 1  and in the emphasis condition  1. there was no interaction effect  f 1  1    1.
finally  comparison of the information from the questionnaire and the results did not reveal any notable variation in terms of reading or musical skill. for instance  the one skilled musician appeared to perform equally as well as the other participants.
overall  the results suggest that background music does not distract users from their primary task  and at the same time can effectively convey information.  in particular  we found no decrease in amount of text editing  primary task  when participants were explicitly instructed to pay attention to the music compared to when participants were explicitly instructed not to pay attention to the music.  nevertheless  we also found a small  1%  decrease in the amount of information our participants extracted from the music in the dual-task as compared to the single-task conditions. of course  it is not surprising to find that performance suffers when people performed two tasks compared to when they performed only one task.  it is a little surprising  however  to find that the primary task  text editing  did not suffer at all  and that the secondary task  server event identification  suffered only a little.
though we followed the same basic paradigm as   our results differ from theirs.  using text-editing along with a visual information monitoring task  maglio and campbell found a decrease in text-editing performance under dual-task as opposed to single-task conditions  and at the same time  found no effect on memorability  or informativeness  of visually monitored information.  the present study obtained the opposite results: namely  no decrease in text-editing performance under dual-task as opposed to single-task conditions  but a decrease in memorability of auditorially monitored information.
acknowledgments
we thank our participants for their enthusiastic help in completing the study. we also thank chris campbell  andreas dieberger  and shumin zhai for helpful comments.
