developing web-based learning materials gives rise to a number of pedagogic problems.  learners are highly diverse in respect to their pedagogical requirements   and the implementation of an effective web-based learning strategy must avoid placing a heavy technological burden on it-na ve academics.
a solution to both of these issues may be provided by software systems know as integrated learning environments  ile . whurle  web-based hierarchical universal reactive
learning environment  is an xml-based ile that is designed to adapt to individual learner profiles  thus redressing some of these major problems with most web-based learning.
keywords
integrated learning environments  education  distributed learning  adaptive hypermedia  xml.
1. introduction
ever since its early days the www has been used as a vehicle for distance and distributed learning.  in recent years a number of generic software solutions known as integrated learning environments  iles   have emerged to facilitate this.  iles are usually designed to be discipline-independent  and thus hold out the prospect of greatly simplifying the process of implementation by partly automating the delivery of content and  to a greater or lesser extent  the burden of pedagogical design.
there is no doubt that the www is extremely good at delivering both information resources and declarative exposition.  however these forms of delivery constitute only one component of an effective learning process.  laurillard  has suggested that learning is best modelled by  conversational  interactions between students and their teachers.  at the heart of this model is an iterative process of dialogue in which both student and teacher describe their conceptions of the focal issue or topic  and the teacher responds to the student's input  adaptively  in accordance with perceived need.  although this adaptive model can  in principle  be implemented on the www  in practice such sophistication is rare.
one of the principal pedagogic weaknesses of the vast majority of iles is their  static content  - i.e.  the system subjects all students to much the same pedagogical experience  regardless of their personal abilities and learning requirements.
1. the need for adaptation
