the national science foundation  u.s.a  project # due1  aims to provide online educational materials for courses in information technology  it  and computer science  cs  areas at the 1-year and 1-year college level. 
keywords 
www-based education  online education  www-based course curricula and courseware  online degree programs in it area. 
1. introduction 
the national science foundation  nsf  project on course  curriculum and lab improvement and educational material development  nsf ccli-emd project   # due-1 is to helping increase the pool of well-educated and highly skilled information technology  it  workers.  
the project addresses the severe current national shortage in the it workforce  the lack of about 1 it workers in 1  that is  unfortunately  projected to persist well into the 1st century  the projected lack is about 1 million it workers in 1   1 1 1 . the aforementioned project is hosted by bradley university  il  u.s.a.  and  particularly  by the nsf bradley center on web-based education at bradley university. 
1. project goal and objectives 
the proposed nsf ccli-emd project has two goals:  
1  accelerating the rate of graduation of information engineering 
technology  iet  students through the active use of innovative oem and teaching and learning technology other than 
classroom-based training  cbt   namely web-based training  wbt   that can be delivered into the workplace and the home at any time. in other words  the traditional  teaching-by-telling  mode of iet education will be complemented  not displaced  by an innovative active  learning-by-doing  online model of iet education.  in this paper  the term  online  implies both webbased synchronous and asynchronous types of communication/learning . 
1  expanding the impact of iet education on various groups of population such as traditional high schools/college/university students and non-traditional students and learners at centers of distance learning  weekend schools  summer institutes  adult vocational centers  career development centers  etc. 
 
given the broad goal of the this project  the specific aims of the nsf-ccli-emd project are to:  
1  develop online educational materials for twelve  1  iet undergraduate courses  provide wide  beta -testing of developed oem  organize and store iet oem in form of  iet courseware cube . 
1  use actively innovative cost-effective and time-effective web-based learning and teaching technologies  and  active learning  paradigm of education that are ideally match goals and objectives of iet education of a broad range of traditional and non-traditional groups of students and learners. 
1  design and develop a specialized  online iet courseware  web server and web page  available 1/1  that will store the developed undergraduate iet oem and disseminate projectrelated information nationwide and worldwide. 
1  create a solid foundation for at least two associate of applied science  aas  and one bachelor of science  bs  online degree programs in iet area. 
1  establish iet  k-1/it industry  consortia with more than 1 project partners -- representatives from various u.s. community colleges  universities  it companies/businesses  and professional associations/ societies  and city school districts. establish articulation agreements between participating educational institutions. establish coop/internship opportunities and vendor-specific certificate programs for iet  online  students and graduates of online programs.  
1  create a project advisory board   about 1 experts  to ensure top quality of project activities and products. 
1  produce iet oem of high quality by using a variety of effective evaluation procedures. provide various forms of formative and summative discussion and evaluation of all project activities and products.  
1  disseminate project products nationwide by means of various aggressive dissemination procedures with special attention to free distribution of project products to a  historically black and hispanic educational institutions  b    tech prep consortia in all 1 states  and c  k-1 institutions in rural areas  of the u.s.  
1  provide constant active training of faculty and teachers focused on design   development and implementation of oem  the web-based innovative teaching and learning technologies and techniques  and state-of-the-art web-based instructional  wbi  tools. 
1  provide sustainability of project activities by self-sustained distribution of project products by means of 1  production and commercial distribution of  cd roms with iet oem  and 1  pre-paid services of the project dedicated web.  
1. project targeted audience  
project products are primarily aimed at various groups on students and life-long mature learners in the united states  especially individuals such as:  
1  students of traditional k-1 institutions who find the online learning a convenience;  
1  adult students who travel a great deal  or have strong commitments for family and/or businesses  and therefore cannot attend weekly on-campus classes;  
1  students who must transfer to another city/state before completing their degree;  
1  adult students at military bases far from u.s. traditional educational institutions;  1  students in rural areas of the u.s.;  
1  disabled students who have no opportunity to attend classes and lab sessions at colleges/universities;  
1  potential international students with internet connectivity anywhere in the world that are willing to take online courses at us k-1 institutions with no visits or minimal numbers of visits to the united states. 
 
1. project expected outcomes 
the primary outcomes of the proposed project are expected to be:  
1  a set of cd-roms that will contain oem for twelve  1  iet undergraduate courses. each course will have three  1  levels of learning such as introductory  intermediate  and advanced levels. 
1  a project  online iet courseware  web server and web page; it is expected that eventually this server will contain oem for forty-eight  1  courses of four  1  it employment tracks. 
1  three  at least  pilot online undergraduate iet programs in participating institutions; several other colleges - project partners  are expected to start  their activities on establishment of their own online programs in it by completion of this project or even before. 
 
1  project-related articles  papers  presentations  surveys  databases of student  faq  and evaluation/testing materials. 1  a large number of faculty who will be re-trained in wbt area; 
1  a designed  developed  and tested  easy-to-replicate  nationwide model of the iet. 
 
1. conclusion 
the proposed nsf -ccli-emd project # due 1: 
1  addresses severe national needs in it workforce  and is aimed on massive production of a well-trained and  highly-skilled it workforce nationwide using innovative web-based teaching and learning technologies  
1  is focused on development  widespread site testing and careful evaluation of iet oem and efforts to promote their effective implementation in k-1 u.s. institutions  
1  has a series of twelve  1  undergraduate advanced  iet courses as a scope   
1  is expected to produce innovative iet oem of a top quality and significance appropriate for national distribution  adaptation  and implementation  
1  cuts across academic disciplinary boundaries by developing 
iet oem for three levels of learning  specifically a  
introductory level  b  intermediate level  and c  advanced level  that may be used by students from various major areas and with different levels and types of background  in the iet area. 
1. acknowledgments 
this project has been made possible by the grant due-1 from the national science foundation  u.s.a. .   
the author of this paper would like to thank dr. claire etaugh and dr. jim miller  for their strong support for this project. 
