　agentcities  is an international initiative designed to explore the commercial and research potential of agentbased applications by constructing an open distributed network of platforms hosting diverse agents and services. the ultimate goal is to enable the dynamic  intelligent and autonomous composition of services to achieve user and business tasks  thereby creating compound services to address changing needs. 
intelligent systems demonstrations 
　inspired by tac  we developed travel agent game in agentcities  taga  built on the foundation of fipa technology and the agentcities infrastructure. the agents and services use standard fipa supported languages  protocols and services to create the travel market environment providing taga with a stable communication environment in which messages in expressive semantic languages can be exchanged. . the travel market is the combination of auctions and varying markets including service registries  service brokerage  wholesalers  peerto-peer transactions  bilateral negotiation  etc. this provides a much richer test bed for experimenting with agents and web services as well as a rich and interesting scenario to test and challenge agent technology. 
1. taga game and agents 
we have designed taga as a general framework for running agent-based simulations and games. our first use of taga has been to build a travel competition along the lines of that used in the first three tacs. in this competition  customers travel from city a to city b and spend several days there. a travel package includes a 
round-trip flight ticket  corresponding hotel accommodation and ticket to entertainment events. a travel agent  an entrant to the game  competes with other travel agents in making contracts with customers and purchasing the limited travel services from the travel service agents. customer selects the travel agent with best travel itinerary. the objective of the travel agent is to acquire more customers  fulfill the customer's travel package  and maximize the profit. 
　taga provides a flexible framework to run the travel market game. figure 1 show the structure of taga. the collaboration and competition among six kinds of agents that play different roles in this market  simulating the real world travel market. we have found that basing our implementation on fipa compliant agents has made the framework extremely flexible. we'll briefly describe the different agents in our initial taga game. 
　the auction service agent  asa  operates all of the auctions and markets in taga. market types currently include english and dutch auctions as well as other dynamic markets similar to priceline and ebay's fastbuy. 
　a service agent  sa  offers travel related service units such as airline tickets  lodging and entertainment tickets. each class of travel related service has multiple providers with different service quality level and with limited service units; 
　a travel agent  ta  is a business that helps customers acquire travel service units and organizes travel plan. the units can be bought either directly from the service agents  or through an auction server. 
　a bulletin board agent  bba  provides a mechanism through which helps customer agents can find and engage one or more travel agents. 
1 
