we introduce a browser session preservation and migration  bspm  infrastructure that allows a user to take a snapshot of an active web session state on a browser.  the bspm infrastructure allows the user to retrieve the snapshot at a later time on a browser to continue the same active web session on any device. the design of the bspm infrastructure is based on a browser-side plug-in that can capture browser session state  and a proxy server that can store browser session snapshots securely for each individual user.  
keywords 
browser session mobility  proxy server  personal mobility 
1 	introduction 
most of the web services found today are session-oriented.  most websites require a client browser to first establish a session and a 
session id.  this session id can then be used by a website to track and to identify the client browser as it moves among different web pages within the website.  when the client browser exits the website  the web session is closed.  this sessionoriented model places a limitation such that for the duration of a web session  the user cannot switch devices; otherwise  she might lose the current active web session and would need to restart it on the new device.  consider a case when she is running an active web session on a stationary device  a desktop pc   but an alternative mobile device  a pocket pc with wireless access  is available to her.  she would like to go mobile  but she could not do so without losing her current active web session on the stationary device.  in other words  she is restricted to the location of her stationary device.  consider another case when she is running an active web session on a mobile device  a pocket pc  with a small screen  but an alternative stationary device  a desktop pc  with a large screen is available to her.  she would like to use the large screen of the stationary device  but again she could not do so without losing her current active web session on the mobile device.  in other words  she is tied to the device that she starts a web session with.   
to address these limitations  we propose a browser session preservation and migration  bspm  infrastructure that enables a user to seamlessly migrate an active web session to any device that is accessible or convenient to her.  before the user switches out of her current device  she preserves her active web session by taking a session snapshot and saving it on a proxy server.  when she finds a new device at a later time  she retrieves the session snapshot from the proxy server and restores it on the new device.  then she can continue with her online activity on the new device.  the session migration is easy and effortless for her.  this proxy server also allows the user to keep track of all her active web sessions-in-progress.  the user can freely stop and continue a 
session-in-progress at any time from any device.   
the design of bspm requires little or no modifications to the existing web servers to support this infrastructure.  in addition  bspm should require little or no modifications to web browser internal.    
1 	design 
the design of bspm infrastructure is shown in figure 1.  it contains 1 modules: bspm plug-in and bspm proxy.  the bspm plug-in allows a user to perform two basic tasks: 
  take a snapshot of the current browser session and store the session snapshot on bspm proxy in a secure manner. 
  retrieve a saved session from bspm proxy to the browser in a secure manner. 

     figure 1: browser session preservation architecture the web session snapshot captures a browser running state  including the last page that appears on the browser  values of document objects  values of scripting objects  values that a user enters in forms on the last page  browser history for back and forward pages  and cookies.  
bspm proxy provides an always-connected storage for authenticated users to store session snapshots.  in addition  bspm proxy is also a web host that serves the document displayed in the bspm plug-in bar shown in figure 1.  by using two basic tasks provided by bspm  the user can easily migrate an active web session between two different devices as shown in figure 1.  prior to leaving the source device  device a   the user takes a snapshot of the browser session and stores the session snapshot on bspm proxy.  after the target device  device b  becomes accessible  the user retrieves the session snapshot from bspm proxy  and restores it to the browser on the target device  device b .   
 	 before the user can take a snapshot of a web session  she needs to sign-on to the bspm proxy so that the bspm proxy can authenticate her.  after sign-on  bspm plug-in allows her to take session snapshots and to restore a session snapshot.  for each snapshot  the user can assign a unique session name as an index in the list of stored session snapshots.  if the user does not give a session name  a default one is generated which is the website hostname.  the user also has an option to protect this session snapshot with a session password.  when the user wants to restore a session snapshot  she selects it from the list of saved session snapshots in the bspm plug-in.  figure 1 shows the screen shots of bspm plug-in before and after sign-on.   

figure 1: bspm plug-in bar before/after sign-on 
an assumption in bspm is that websites do not set short time-out policies that automatically close a session-in-progress with a client browser after the session-in-progress is preserved and becomes inactive.  adjustment of time-out policies is the only modification required on websites.  for websites that must have short time-out policies  a user would need to be aware to activate preserved session snapshots in time before time-out occurs. 
1 	implementation 
we have created a prototype implementation of bspm proxy and bspm plug-in that runs on microsoft internet explorer  ie  version 1 or later.  due to limitation on the number of pages  we will not describe the implementation details.  
1 	related work & discussion 
bspm is similar to bookmark concept on existing web browsers  it is also called  favorites  on microsoft internet explorer .  bookmarks allow a user to save urls to web pages  so that she can quickly come back to these pages at a later time.  an alternative solution to bspm is to simply synchronize bookmarks between the switching-from device and switching-to device  but this solution is insufficient.  bookmarks can only work on static web pages which do not accumulate any runtime browser state with users  e.g.  these static web pages do not contain client-side scriptings  and cookies to track web sessions.  in comparison  bspm can work on both static and dynamic web pages.  as a matter of fact  most web services available today on www make extensive use of browsers' capabilities to support client-side scripting  and cookies to track sessions. 
application-layer mobility in sip  shares a similar goal with bspm.  sip provides session mobility that allows a user to change terminals while maintaining a running media session  personal mobility that allows other people to address a single user located at different terminals  and service mobility that allows a 
user to change terminals while maintaining access to services.  however  sip is targeted toward telecommunication services  such as video conferencing  voice over ip  and instant messages.  in comparison  bspm is targeted specifically to provide session mobility for web browser applications. 
service hand-off  in the iceberg project and universal inbox  describe architectures that can support personal mobility and service mobility for a user who may want to switch between heterogeneous access networks or between heterogeneous access devices.  they deal with issues such as data transformation into different formats that can be accepted by heterogeneous devices  storage and processing for redirecting messages to preferred device that users designate  and heterogeneous device name translation and mapping which may be based on naming schemes other than ip.  like sip  service hand-off and universal inbox are targeted toward telecommunication services.     
mobile people project  utilizes personal proxy to route communication to a mobile user  independently of the user's location and applications she is currently using.  personal proxy shares a similar concept of personal data storage as our bspm proxy.  in addition to personal data storage  personal proxy also plays an active role in tracking mobile people's whereabouts  routing application communications  and transforming communication protocol to the preferred devices designated by mobile people.  in comparison  bspm proxy provides a centralized personal data storage specifically for browser session state preservation and migration  rather than a broader range of personal data.   
1 	conclusion and future work 
we describe bspm infrastructure that brings browser session mobility to users.  bspm enables a user to switch devices in the middle of an active browser session.  in addition  it enables a user to preserve multiple active web sessions for restoration at a later time on any device with a built-in browser support.  for our future work  we expect such browser session mobility to occur among heterogeneous devices with html and non-html browsers.  the same web document can have different presentations  html  chtml  or wml  on different browsers.  as a result  the preserved session state may require transformation before it can be restored on another browser of a different device platform. 
