with the wide use of monitoring systems  there emerges an ever increasing amount of surveillance videos. sequential browsing of such videos from the database is time consuming and tedious for users  and thus cannot take full advantage of the rich information contained in video data. in this paper  a general framework for semantic video mining and retrieval is proposed. the framework detects and retrieves semantic events from surveillance videos. it starts by tracking and modeling the trajectories of semantic objects in videos. after that  some general user-interested semantic events are modeled. the goal is to retrieve these semantic events by analyzing the spatiotemporal trajectory sequences. however  since individual users may have their own subjective query targets  these event models may be too general to capture the subjectivity of each individual user. therefore  in this paper  the mining and retrieval phase is designed to dynamically learn the user's interest by interacting with the user. this technique is called the relevance feedback  rf  which is commonly used for content-based image retrieval  but seldom applied to the field of semantic video mining. due to the spatiotemporal nature of video events  substantial extensions to rf  especially its associated learning mechanisms  are needed to apply it to semantic video mining. the learning framework proposed in this paper bases its structure on the neural network for time series data  which is usually adopted for prediction purposes  and we tailor it to suit the specific needs of spatiotemporal video event mining. in this paper  transportation surveillance videos are used to demonstrate the design details.  
categories and subject descriptors 
h.1  information systems : database applications - data mining. h.1  information systems : information search and retrieval - relevance feedback  search process. 
general terms 
algorithms  design  experimentation  human factors. 
keywords 
multimedia data mining  spatial and temporal data mining  visual data mining  content-based video retrieval  relevance feedback  neural network. 
1. introduction 
with the development of modern monitoring systems  there is an urgent need for techniques to automatically analyze and retrieve useful information from surveillance videos. users are no longer satisfied with the video retrieval system that merely provides vcr functionality. they want to query the semantic content instead of sequentially browsing. content-based retrieval of surveillance videos becomes a challenging and important task. this requires the machine to  learn  and  understand  the semantics of surveillance videos. in light of the status quo of existing techniques  there are two challenges we are yet to meet.  
firstly  current techniques on video content analysis are mostly shot-based. these techniques target at such video types as movies  news broadcasts or sports games. by shot segmentation and key frame extraction  1  1   the content of the video can be analyzed. however  surveillance videos are different from the above in that they are composed of monotonously running frames with no clear shot boundaries. therefore  the traditional shot based video content analysis techniques cannot be directly applied to the surveillance videos. the proposed semantic video retrieval framework extracts semantic scenes by analyzing the spatiotemporal relations among moving and still objects in the video. 
secondly  surveillance videos are a special kind of multimedia data. traditional data mining methods cannot meet the special requirements in understanding the semantic meaning of and extracting knowledge from the raw multimedia data. specifically  videos are composed of running images  which are dynamic and spatiotemporal in nature. many researchers have focused on interpreting the video contents based on such low level features as color histograms and mid-level features as object trajectories. some machine learning techniques are also employed to analyze these low level features  1  1  1 . however  it is inherently hard for the machine to understand the video content by simply reading pixels  frames or signals. there is a  semantic gap  between the low level features and the high level human concepts. the proposed framework strives to reduce this  gap  by the  relevance feedback  technique.  
relevance feedback  rf  is a well-known technique in the field 

permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  or republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
kdd/mdm'1  august 1  1  san jose  ca  usa. 
copyright 1 acm 1-1-1/1...$1.  
of image retrieval. it is used to incorporate the user's subjective perceptions with the learning process  1  1  for content-based image retrieval  cbir . the basic idea of relevance feedback is to ask the user's opinion on the retrieval result for a user-specified query target. based on these opinions  the learning mechanism tries to refine the retrieval result in the next iteration. as a supervised learning technique  relevance feedback has been shown to significantly increase the retrieval accuracy. 
