   participants were asked to propose a  trec-style  task  which could be used for the trec 1 blog track. this means that the results of the task can be evaluated by a team of assessors and that different approaches can be compared. groups taking part in the open task were asked to submit a paper describing their proposed task in two steps: first  submit a short abstract  including the definition of the task  some motivation on why it is useful in a realistic blog retrieval environment  and a brief description of the proposed assessment procedure  e.g.  how is the task being evaluated  . secondly  submit a full paper providing a thorough discussion of the proposed task.
1 participants and results
in total  five proposals were submitted to the open task. they are briefly described below.
nec laboratories america proposed the task of identifying spam blogs  splogs  in the collection. spam blogs are a serious issue in the blogosphere  and their elimination may be a key part in improving results of blog retrieval and other tasks involving blogs. specifically  the suggested tasks included identification of splogs with fixed training and test sets  and an adaptive splog identification task  where the performance is measured incrementally  as more and more data is available to the system.
the university of maryland baltimore county and johns hopkins university also proposed the task of splog detection  where the collection is split in time  the first part used for training and the second for testing. participants would be required to identify splogs in the test collection  and possibly also suggest the type of spamming method being used. an additional extension of the task would evaluate the contribution of spam detection and removal to retrieval performance.
robert gordon university proposed a task related to the identification of emerging trends in blogs: topics  which are discussed substantially more during a specific time interval than during preceding intervals. participants in this task would be given a set of topics and training intervals for each  and would be required to predict those topics that would become  hot topics  during a test interval. possible approaches to deciding whether a topic is an emerging trend include the volume of discussion about the topic in terms of number of posts or their length  as well as the relation between the topic and other topics.
csiro ict centre advocated the idea that the availability of more information about a situation and person  i.e. context  will lead to better results for users of search systems. they proposed a sentiment-related task where the blogger's sense-of-self and its changes over time are analysed from the blog posts. in particular  participants in this task would be required to identify  as a first stage  those bloggers who display substantial changes in sense-ofself over time  and  as a second stage  the blog posts which contribute most to tracking these changes. identifying the blogger's sense-of-self is seen as a partial approach to providing context to the retrieval of blog posts. what this deeper context may add to explicit and implicit search is touched on.
the national institute of informatics  japan proposed a task that is similar to the story link detection at the tdt evaluation  and which involves identifying whether two blog posts discuss the same topic. participants of this task would be given a set of pairs of blog posts  and would return  for each pair  a decision on whether the two posts are linked - meaning that they share the same topic. applications of this task include summarisation and  related posts  suggestion.
¡¡all the above participants were invited to a  separate  pre-trec 1 workshop  to discuss their task proposals. the main purpose of the workshop is to plan the track activities for trec 1. while the workshop outcome did not lead to a clear consensus on the submitted proposals  two possible tasks have emerged:
  an information filtering-like task  e.g. inform me of new blog entries about x  x being a target as in the opinion retrieval task.
  a blog expert-like task  e.g. find the best blog entries about x  or bloggers with a  recurring  interest in x  x is again a target.
   both above tasks address some interesting features of the blogosphere  and are currently being investigated for a second evaluated task in the trec 1 blog track.
1 conclusions
trec 1 was the first year the blog track was run. a new large test collection of blog data  called blog1  was created  and a particular feature of blogs has been tackled  namely the opinionated nature of posts on the blogosphere. the participants results suggest that this task is challenging  and requires further investigation. we found that the retrieval performance on the opinion retrieval task is strongly dominated by the performance on the underlying topic relevance task  emphasising the importance of a strong retrieval baseline. we also found that the pooled documents were not infiltrated by spam to any great extent  and the presence of the spam in the pool did not affect the overall ranking of systems. moreover  there was no strong evidence that the participating systems retrieved one kind of opinion over another. finally  there seems to be a positive but not strong correlation between difficulty of topics  in terms of opinion-finding map and topic-relevance map. it is hoped that by using the relevance assessments of this year as training data  participants will be able to further their techniques for identifying opinionated blog posts.
   for the open task  there was no clear emerging task suitable for evaluation in trec 1. however  an information filtering or blog identification task  as discussed in section 1  seem to address some interesting elements of the blogosphere  and could be run in forthcoming blog tracks.
task details for trec 1 blog track are maintained on the track wiki  at http://www.science.uva.
nl/research/iiwiki/wiki/index.php/trec-blog.
details on the trec 1 blog track are provided on the following wiki page: http://ir.dcs.gla.
ac.uk/wiki/trec-blog
acknowledgements
we are grateful to nielsen buzzmetrics/blogpulse for contributing a feed list for creating the blog1 test collection. we also would like to thank matthew hurst and janyce wiebe for useful advice and discussions on setting up the opinion retrieval task. we would like to thank ali azimi bolourian for monitoring some of the crawls during the blog1 test collection creation. finally  we would like to thank gianni amati for various comments on the blog track.
   gilad mishne and maarten de rijke were supported by the netherlands organization for scientific research  nwo  under project number 1-1.
