this paper reports on work done for the genomics track at trec 1 by 
converspeech llc in conjunction with scientists at the saccharomyces genome 
database  sgd   the model organism database located at stanford university  california. the rapidly increasing number of articles in the biomedical literature has created new urgency for software tools that find information relevant to specific information needs. we focused on two challenges in this work: the problems of synonymy  several terms having the same meaning  and polysemy  a term having more than one meaning   and the problem of constructing queries from information needs stated in natural language. we investigated the use of concept extraction for the second problem  relying on the limited statements of information need as the source of textual analysis. to minimize the problem of synonymy  we investigated the use of a language-oriented biomedical ontology and mesh  medical subject headings  for term expansion. additionally  to minimize the problem of polysemy  we used extracted concepts to analyze and rank the documents returned by a search. we submitted two sets of results to trec for evaluation  the first one produced automatically  the second derived from the first by making specific kinds of changes in the query and ranking methods. the mean average precision  map  for the automatic result was lower than the median of the 1 submitted runs overall; however  desirable results were obtained for mean average precision at 1 and 1 documents for almost half the topics. the map for the derived result was higher than the median  a desirable result. 
 
background 
need. the rapidly increasing number of articles in the biomedical literature has created new urgency for software tools that find information relevant to specific information needs. the text retrieval conference  trec   co-sponsored by the national institute of standards and technology  nist  and u.s. department of defense  supports largescale evaluation of text retrieval methodologies.  the trec 1 genomics track contained a task  called the ad hoc information retrieval task  that consisted of 1 specific information needs collected from interviews with biomedical scientists. documents relevant to these needs had to be located within a 1-year subset of the medline bibliographic database and the results sorted according to their estimated relevance. this paper reports on work done for the ad hoc task by converspeech llc in conjunction with scientists at sgd  a scientific database of the molecular biology and genetics of the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae located at stanford university  california . 
 
problems. the language of biomedical text.  the language of biomedical texts  like all natural language  is complex in structure and morphology  the basic units of meaning  and poses problems of synonymy  several terms having the same meaning   polysemy  a term having more than one meaning   hypernymy  one term being more general than another   and hyponymy  one term being more specific than another   among others. we investigated the use of our language-oriented biomedical ontology  called biomedplus  along with mesh  medical subject headings  terms to provide synonyms to produce an expanded query. in doing so  the problem of polysemy was exacerbated  which we then also addressed. 
natural-language information needs. the second major challenge we addressed was how to transform the natural-language descriptions given by the interviewed biomedical scientists into queries that can be submitted to an information retrieval system. concept extraction is the process of deriving terms from natural-language text that are considered representative of what the text is about. the terms are natural-language words and phrases  which may or may not themselves occur with the original text. we investigated the use of concept extraction to produce both a set of terms for the initial query and a set of terms for analyzing the documents returned by the initial query  ranking them according to their estimated relevance. this ranking helps minimize the problem of polysemy.   
limited sources for textual analysis. although inverse document frequency methods have long been used to assess the retrieval quality of a term   we wanted to evaluate a way of finding good terms when a document set may not be available  or may be changing too rapidly  for the tf*idf method  or when all that is available is a short piece of text. this interest led to our use of concept extraction for this information retrieval task. 
 
hypothesis.   the primary evaluation measure for the task was mean average precision  map  defined as the average precision at each point a relevant document is retrieved. recall and precision are calculated as usual  with recall being the percentage of relevant documents returned by the system at the point of measurement  and precision being the percentage of the documents returned by the system at the point of measurement that are actually relevant. the hypothesis of our study was that our concept extraction methods and our approach to synonymy and polysemy would yield desirable map results.  
 
results 
we submitted two sets of results to trec for evaluation  one labeled conversauto and the other conversmanu. the first was produced automatically  with no human intervention. the second was derived from the first after consultation with our collaborators at sgd. we added an additional automatically constructed query term for all topics and made three additional kinds of changes in the query and analysis  ranking  terms that proved successful. the mean average precision  map  for conversauto was 1 and for conversmanu 1. the map for conversmanu was higher than the median 1 of all the 1 submitted runs  a desirable result. the map for conversmanu was lower  but for almost half the topics the mean average precision at 1 and 1 documents surpassed or equaled the corresponding medians. 
 
 
materials and methods 
medline.  a typical medline record consists of fields for author name s   title  abstract  date of publication  dp field   mesh terms  mh field with medical subject heading terms selected by bibliographic and subject specialists   chemical terms  rn field with terms selected by bibliographic and subject specialists   date the medline record was completed  dcom field   and so on. the 1-year window used to select medline records was from 1 to 1 inclusive  as identified by dcom. within this subset  therefore  there were some records for articles published before 1; the dcom field notes the date the article's citation was completed for medline  not the article's date of publication.  the subset  in fact  had 1  1%  articles published prior to 1  1  1%  articles published prior to 1  and 1  1%  articles published prior to 1. the remaining 1 1  1%  articles were published within the 1-year period of 1. of the total 1 1 articles  approximately 1% had abstracts; the remaining 1% lacked abstracts.  
 
topics.  the topics consisted of the following three fields  plus an identification field used for processing :  
     title  an abbreviated statement of the information need  
     information need  a full statement the information need 
     context  background information to place the information need in context. in addition to the 1 topics used for the runs submitted to trec  an additional five sample topics were made available for early experimentation. one is displayed in figure 1.  
 
title pbr1 used as a gene vector  
need find information about base sequences and restriction maps in plasmids that are used as gene vectors  
context the researcher would like to manipulate the plasmid by removing a particular gene and needs the original base sequence or restriction map information of the plasmid figure 1 - sample topic  
 
biomedplus ontology.  the converspeech ontology  biomedplus  is a federated  language-oriented ontology constructed from locuslink   go   kegg  1  1   and sgd   and modeled on wordnet  1   a widely used general ontology for the english language. it includes a vocabulary  which promotes a standard way of naming the concepts of the domain  and a system of hierarchical and other relations between and among the concepts and the vocabulary items. it also includes definitions of the vocabulary items. concepts in biomedplus are represented as synonym sets  which are sets of words or phrases that express the same meaning or refer to the same biomedical entity in at least one context. the vocabulary in biomedplus is therefore divided into sets of synonyms  each representing a single underlying concept.  information on synonyms is readily available in the biomedical sources from which the ontology is built.  each synonym set may have one or more relationships to other synonym sets.  for example  a hypernymy relationship indicates that one concept is a kind of  or subordinate to  the other concept.  glucose metabolism  for example  is a kind of hexose metabolism  which in turn is a kind of monosaccharide metabolism. 
biomedplus can also store non-hierarchical relationships  such as go associations.  the same word or phrase may occur in more than one source ontology; however each usage of the word or phrase may have a different meaning.  to differentiate between these meanings  separate uses of a word or phrase are assigned separate sense number  which are simple integers.  for example  the first use of  sfd  is assigned the sense number 1  written as  sfd#1    the second usage assigned sense number 1   sfd#1    and so on. 
 
concept extraction.  concept extraction is the process of deriving terms from natural-language text that are considered representative of what the text is about. the terms are natural-language words and phrases  which may or may not themselves appear in the original text.  we began by counting as concepts those words and phrases in the title  need  and context that were:  
  also entries in the converspeech biomedplus ontology  
  collocations found through statistical analysis of some combination of title  need  and context  using the method of likelihood ratios   and 
  words and phrases that were neither part of general english  as determined by our adapted wordnet model  nor entries in the biomedplus ontology. this rule aimed to capture those biomedical terms that have not yet found their way into any of the sources for biomedplus but are not regular english words. words and phrases that were simple pluralizations of words and phrases already extracted were not considered separate concepts. words and phrases on a stop list  currently compiled heuristically  containing terms judged too general to be of interest  e.g.   gene   were eliminated. no synonyms were used at this stage; the concepts extracted so far were always themselves words or phrases appearing in the title  need  or context. trial and error experimentation using the five sample topics led us to use the following concepts for the initial query. 
let c1 be the set of concepts extracted from the title  need  and context. 
let c1 be the set of concepts extracted from the title and need. 
then let q1  q1  and q1 be sets that contain terms for the initial query  where  
q1 contains every term from c1 that is from go or kegg; that is  the title and the need concepts that correspond to go or kegg terms  
q1 contains every remaining term from c1 that appears in the title but is not part of general english  as determined by our adapted wordnet   and 
q1 contains every remaining term in c1. 
for analyzing and ranking the returned documents according to their estimated relevance  we defined an additional set a1 as follows: 
a1 contains every term from c1 which did not appear in q1  q1 or q1  that is  the concepts provided by the context that were not already in the other concept sets.  
these sets were defined to give greater weight to the title and need and to words and phrases derived from go and kegg. the initial query was then constructed as follows: 
 boolean or of all terms in q1  and  boolean or of all terms in q1  and 
 boolean or of all terms in q1  
figure 1 shows the concepts  initial query and ranking concepts for the sample topic in figure 1. 
   
c1 c1 base sequence 
gene vector pbr1 plasmid restriction map gene vector pbr1 plasmid    
q1:  empty  
q1: pbr1 	 
q1: plasmid  gene vector 
 
initial query:  pbr1  and  plasmid or gene vector  
ranking concepts: base sequence  restriction map 
figure 1 - concepts  initial query  and ranking concepts for sample topic 
 
for the derived queries used to produce conversmanu  we constructed an additional query term  q1  for each topic. it consisted of every remaining term from c1 that is a species name. the derived query was then built by adding the terms in q1 as follows: 
 boolean or of all terms in q1  and  boolean or of all terms in q1  and 
 boolean or of all terms in q1  
and  boolean or of all terms in q1 . 
 
there are many different ways of using the title  need  and context concepts in constructing the query  and many different logical forms the query could take. without further analysis to see what works best  and possibly why  we make no claim about the specific form of the queries. our main interest was in seeing if the concepts extracted appeared to pick out significant terms for searching and ranking that gave reasonable results.   
search engine.  the query was processed by a proprietary search engine that uses the pubmed e-utilities . first  however  each term was run through the biomedplus ontology to find synonyms. an expanded search query was built with the synonyms added in using the boolean or where appropriate. when this query was passed to pubmed via the e-utilities  a further step of query transformation took place. mesh translations were provided wherever one existed  and  again  using the boolean or  a final query was constructed for searching medline. the mesh translations often appended the search delimiter  mh  to the mesh term  ensuring that the term would be matched only against the same term in the mh field of the medline record. at this stage  the concepts extracted and constructed from the title  need  and context are represented by many terms that do not appear in the original natural-language description. additional terms have come from synonyms and mesh terms. figure 1 shows one synonym that was added for topic 1 and two mesh translations that were provided for topic 1. 
 
 
 
 
term synonym or mesh translation trp1 transformation related protein 1 atpase adenosinetriphosphatase  mh  binding pharmacokinetics  mh  figure 1 - synonyms or mesh translations 
 
because pubmed does not allow searching by dcom-the date field used to create the base document set-our queries were limited instead by the edat field  the date the citation was added to the pubmed database  and the results were pruned against the list of pubmed ids known to be in the base document set.  
　　　typically  adding in biomedical synonyms introduces a great many terms  many of which in different contexts are not synonyms with the original term at all. for example  the following are all synonyms for  cgi-1 :  
atp1h  atpase  h+ transporting  lysosomal 1kda  v1 subunit h   sfd  sfdalpha  sfdbeta vma1. 
but the term  sfd   an abbreviation for  sub fifty-eight-kda doublet  or  sub-fiftyeight-kda dimer   is also widely used as an acronym in biomedical texts and has several dozen other meanings as a result. adding this term to the search will pull in many irrelevant articles. by matching the concepts extracted from the original naturallanguage statements of need to those in the returned documents  we can score the documents based on their fit with the original concepts and so rank them by estimated relevance. documents that have nothing to do with the original statement of need typically score so low that they essential fall out of contention. 
 
analyzing the documents for ranking. each document found by pubmed was analyzed against both the query terms  q1  q1  q1  and the analysis terms  a1  and given a score. this analysis was performed on a local version of the pubmed documents as supplied to trec participants. the terms were matched using a norm-like algorithm adapted from the umls norm procedure . the algorithm works as follows. given a phrase that we are trying to match: 
  the words in that phrase are converted to lower-case.  
  words from the stop list are discarded.  
  the words are stored  for matching in any order.  
  the words are also passed through the porter stemmer  a widely available algorithm for stemming english words so that words with the same stem can be treated identically. e.g.   connector  and  connections  both stem to  connect.   biomedical terms frequently appear in variant forms. we took lexical variants into account by using the following rules to conflate variants and have them count as the same term:   
  hyphenated expressions such as  il-1  are treated as two words ensuring that we can match such expressions when an author and the ontology disagree about the hyphenation.  e.g.   il 1  in the text will match  il-1  in the ontology and vice versa. 
  any expression of the form {numbers}{letters} or {letters}{numbers} is treated as two separate words.  e.g.   th1  is considered two words   th  and  1   and  1kda  is two words  1  and  kda.  
  all other internal punctuation is treated as a word break.  e.g.   dur1  would be two words  dur1  and  1 .  however  because these rules are cumulative  the previous rule also applies to  dur1  which is treated as two words  dur  and  1.  
for scoring the documents returned by the search  we made the following matches using the title  abstract  rn  chemical terms  field and mh  mesh terms  field of the medline record. we scored each match  giving the greatest weight to matches in the title and the last two sentences of the abstract. 
1. for each term in the query  including any synonyms  full matches in the title and in the last two sentences of the abstract scored 1 for the first occurrence and 1 for each subsequent occurrence. full matches elsewhere  i.e.  rest of abstract  mh  rn  scored 1 for the first occurrence and 1  1  and 1 for the second  third and subsequent matches.  
1. for each analysis term extracted from the topic  full matches in the title and in the last two sentences of the abstract scored 1 for the first occurrence and 1  1  1  and 1 for the second  third  fourth  fifth and subsequent matches. full matches elsewhere  i.e.  rest of abstract  mh  rn  scored 1 for the first occurrence and 1  1  and 1 for the second  third and subsequent occurrences. 
the title and last two sentences of the abstract are scored first  then the rest of the abstract and the mh and rn fields.  so  for example  a term occurring in the title  last sentence of the abstract  and in the body of the abstract has its first and second occurrences in the highest scoring parts of the document. occurrence is counted anywhere.  so if a query term  t bet  matches in the title and in the middle of the abstract it would score 1  first occurrence in title  + 1  second occurrence elsewhere . this scoring was determined through trial and error and we make no particular claim for its general applicability. it merely served as some reasonable way of assessing the value of the extracted concepts for analyzing and ranking the returned documents. 
 
relevance judgments.  relevance judgments for all runs submitted to trec were done using the conventional  pooling method.  that is  the top-ranking documents from each official run were pooled and given to an individual  blinded to the query statement and participant from whom they came  who judged relevance. the pools were built by collecting one run from each of the 1 participating groups  taking the top 1 documents for each topic and eliminating the duplicates to create a single pool for each topic. the average pool size  average number of documents judged per topic  was 1  with a range of 1. given that neither the pools nor the documents judged relevant are necessarily true subsets of the relevant documents  we produced figure 1 to help us evaluate our results. the interpretation of the sets in figure 1 is given in table 1.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
figure 1 - theoretical results possible for each topic 
 
the set labeled  found by search  contains all the documents returned by our search for that topic. up to 1 documents could be submitted for each topic in a run. the set labeled  top 1  represents the subset of found documents that were submitted. if fewer than 1 documents were found  then all those found were submitted  and the set  top 1  actually contained fewer than 1 and was identical to the set  found by search.  in such a case  sets c  d  and h will be empty. the set formed by the union of  judged relevant  and  judged not relevant  is the pool that was submitted to the judge.  
 
set label found submitted relevant comment a positive yes yes yes what we are after! contains relevant documents that we found. b false positive yes  yes no contains documents we would like to score lower or not be found. c false negative a yes  no yes contains documents we would like to score higher. d negative a yes no no contains documents we found that were correctly eliminated by scoring. e false negative b no no yes contains documents that we missed through an overly restrictive search. f negative b no no no contains documents we did not find that were irrelevant but some other run found them relevant.  g false positive or positive yes yes unknown contains documents we found that did not make it into the pool. they might be relevant documents missed or ranked too low by others  or  more likely  were not relevant but we found them and ranked them too high when they were ranked very low or passed over by others. set label found submitted relevant comment h false negative or negative yes no unknown contains documents we found that did not make it into the pool  and didn't make it into our submission wither. they might be relevant documents missed or ranked too low by others  or  more likely  were not relevant and we found them but correctly ranked them low when they were ranked very low or passed over by others.  i all documents in search set no no unknown everything. table 1 - explanation of theoretical results possible for each individual topic 
 
discussion 
　　　the results of greatest interest to us were for those topics that saw a significant improvement from the automatic run to the manual or derived run. examining the changes made  we identified four that were particularly successful:  1  automatically adding to the query an additional conjunctive term for the species name  as discussed earlier;  1  adding query terms to the analysis terms  or visa versa; and  1  adding a query term that was needed because of the inadequacy of the stemming algorithm. for several topics  the terms  apoptosis  and  apoptotic   for example  did not stem to the same form. adding  apoptotic  gave better results and better rankings. we are now investigating adapting or building a stemmer that is specifically attuned to biomedical language.  
　　　one other general change that was of interest was  1  that for some topics the automated method produced no query or analysis terms at all. this problem was responsible most often for poor results in the automated run. it resulted from an extra step in the concept extraction process that was not laid out in the earlier discussion. that is  in this process all the possible concepts are pooled along with their immediate hypernyms and definitions  if they exist  and formed into a network that relates individual words to phrases that they appear in. the network also tracks the frequency of occurrence of each word or phrase. only those concepts that  through their degree of relatedness within the network  reach a predefined significance threshold are counted as final concepts. for example  for topic 1  before the final assessment of the terms' place in its network of related concepts  the following emerged as likely concepts: cell  cell cycle  gis1  metabolism  and yeast. afterwards  no concepts were considered significant. the query term proposed by the biologist was  gis1  and the analysis terms  cell cycle    metabolism   and  yeast carbon pathways.  the terms that proved useful for analysis were  in fact   gis1  and  metabolism.  so it turns out the concept extraction method was producing good concepts; they were often dropped  however  on the incorrect judgment that they did not reach threshold significance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
title gis1  
need properties of gis1 with respect to cell cycle and/or metabolism.  
context it is possible that gis1 plays a role between cell cycle and yeast carbon pathways and that there is a link between cell cycle and metabolism. a relevant document is one that supports or refutes this hypothesis with regard to the properties of gis1 in one or both processes. figure 1 - topic 1 
 
although this final step in concept extraction has proved useful for other tasks  not in the biomedical domain   we would not use it again  but would revert to the more straightforward selection of concepts that has been used for other biomedical tasks  1  1 . 
 
