   the 1 trec genomics evaluation focuses on document  passage and aspect retrieval in the genomics domain. the erasmus medical center  tno and university of twente collaborated on an approach combining concept tagging  named entity recognition  and information retrieval based on statistical language models. experiments on the 1 collection show that document retrieval based on concepts could not outperform the baseline based on words. however  experiments on the 1 collection shows no significant difference between the two approaches. further investigation has to show if and how these concept and word based language models can be effectively combined.
1 introduction
the trec genomics track focuses on information retrieval in the genomics domain. the 1 task introduces a passage retrieval task which evaluates the retrieval performance at passage  aspect and document level . this report discusses the collaborative work of the university of twente  erasmus medical center and tno for the trec genomics track 1 in which we combine our experience from previous trec evaluations  1  1  1 .
   working with genomics literature is a challenge not only because of ambiguity inherent to natural language. the same vocabulary is used for different biomedical concepts  concepts are known by multiple names and some concept names have generic english meanings as well . we expect that explicitly tagging documents with biomedical concepts can improve information retrieval. ideally  correctly identified concepts in both documents and queries should improve precision in the search process. on the other hand  errors in the translation between words and concepts might lead to decreased performance. furthermore  the specificity of the concepts in the queries should match those in the relevant documents.
   in our approach we have focused on improving biomedical document retrieval by using statistical language models based on concepts. for the 1 evaluation  an ad hoc algorithm was developed to extract relevant passages from relevant documents.
in this report we will try to answer the following research questions:
  can a retrieval system based on concept language models outperform a system based on only words 
  what is the influence of tagging concepts at different levels of specificity 
  what is the influence of using full text papers on retrieval performance 
  what is the influence of mistagging concepts in the topics 
   the outline of this report is as follows. sections 1 and 1 discuss the method used for preprocessing and tagging the documents and topic descriptions with biomedical concepts. section 1 describes the document retrieval method. an ad hoc algorithm was applied to extract relevant passages from relevant documents  which is described in section 1. section 1 describes the experiments and results carried out with the 1 and 1 collection and queries  followed by a concluding section.
1 document and topic preprocessing
the html documents are split into sections with corresponding section titles  using several different templates to support the differences in document formatting. texts within  table    a   hyperlink   and  font  tags are ignored  thus also ignoring figure captions. sentences are split using a simple algorithm developed by our team  using an unsupervised sentence boundary detection approach  based on the work of a. mikheev  . for each sentence the byte offsets of the first and the last character in that sentence are reported. this set is made available for download for other trec participants .
