   the aim of our participation in the topic distillation and the named page finding tasks of the web track is the evaluation of a well-founded modular probabilistic framework for web information retrieval  which integrates content and link analyses. the link analysis component of the framework employs a new probabilistic approach  called the absorbing model  for calculating a measure of popularity for documents induced from the web graph.
1 introduction
both topic distillation and named page finding tasks require a high precision in the ranking  since there are few relevant documents for the topic distillation task  which reduce to one for the named page finding task. results of trec last year  have shown that the link structure upon the web hardly combines with the content analysis  at least for the topic relevance task. similarly  the length of the url and other heuristics have shown to be more effective than the explicit use of the link structure for the homepage finding task. in general  it has been found that pure link structure analysis does not enhance retrieval effectiveness.
   our participation in the web track focuses on a novel way to integrate content with link analysis. we propose a method for combining content and links in a sound and non-parametric way  as well as a dynamic spreading activation mechanism to be applied on top of this methodology. we evaluate our proposals by extending the framework used in trec1  in a modular way. the refined content analysis module is integrated with a new link analysis module. moreover  the system is extended with a new query expansion module  which can be enabled  or disabled during the retrieval process.
   the preliminary results reported in this paper show that link analysis may benefit the ranking  enhancing the overall retrieval effectiveness. however  its success strongly depends on the basic probabilistic link model used  as well as on the methodology employed to build the link structure graph. our approach differs from that used in pagerank  and it can be seen as a dynamic modification of the link structure according to the content and thus  indirectly  to the query. moreover  results show that differentstrategies are requiredfor optimal topic distillation and namedpage finding effectiveness.
   the rest of the paper is organised as follows. in section 1  the proposed approaches and their rationale are described. section 1 contains a detailed description of the runs submitted  and in section 1 we present a preliminary analysis of the results.

also affiliated to fondazione ugo bordoni  rome.
1 integration of content and link analyses
we introduce a new probabilistic model  which we call the absorbing model  for analysing the link structure of web documents . this method provides us with a measure of authority for documents  based on the probability distribution of accessing the states of a markov chain  which is induced from the web graph. this probabilitydistribution correspondsto the principal eigenvectorof the adjacency matrix of the web graph  and it is computed by an iterative but necessary converging process. we apply this method either statically or dynamically.
1 a parameter-free link model: the absorbing model
pagerank  connects any couple of documents in the collection through a virtual link  with a very small transition probability  which is a parameter for the algorithm. in the terminology of markov chains  all documents on the web become ergodic states  which are treated as nodes belonging to a unique large cluster. this cluster guarantees that all documents receive a probability different from zero  the authoritativescore   which is the probabilitythat the node is reached by any possible random walk through the nodes of the collection. our markov chain model offers a completely different solution. we transform the original graph to make all states ergodic and have many different clusters instead of one. the transition probabilities are then computed accordingly. in this transformation process  we do not need the use of parameters to obtain the final authoritative scores.
1 static application of the absorbing model
for the static application of the absorbing model  sam   we first calculate an absolute authority score for each document in the collection during indexing. after retrieval is performed  this authority score is combined with the content based score in a parametric way. this approach is similar to the pagerank philosophy.
1 dynamic application of the absorbing model
the dynamicapplicationof the absorbingmodel  whichis called dynamicabsorbingmodel  dam   seems to be promising. it is applied only on the top retrieved documents and aims to provide a dynamic authority measure. the retrieved documents are returned by the application of a classical content analysis model. using a high quality content retrieval module  we assume that most of the authoritative documents will be among the top ranked documents  and thus the application of link analysis may change  but not drastically  the ranking of documents. following this idea  the dam is applied on the set of the top ranked documents. the priors are initialised using the scores of the content analysis. among the top retrieved documents  we select the subset   with
　　　　　　  with the highest content scores. we suppose that the documents in this set should be more authoritative than the remaining ones in . therefore  we modify the subgraph of the subset of the top ranked documents of by removing their outgoing links. in this way  the documents in the set that might be relevant are boosted according to the link structure of   while documents in do not loose their authority score but they may inherit some more from . the application of dam does not involve any training  which makes it suitable for large collections of documents  such as the web.
1 spreading activation
in addition to the absorbing model  we propose a dynamic spreading activation mechanism for finding the best entry points for topics on the web.
   spreading activation is a well known mechanism used in hypertext and web retrieval systems  1  1   where a fraction of the retrieval status value  rsv  of each document propagates to the documents linked by it  assuming that documents linked by other relevant documents  are possibly relevant as well. we adapt this mechanism in order to fit our need for identifying the best entry points for a topic. in our method  which we call static spreading activation  ssa   the propagationof rsvs is performed only when the documents linked belong to the same domain and the source document of the link is deeper in the document tree than the destination document.
1 query-biased spreading activation
the above spreading activation mechanism is refined by allowing the fraction of the that propagates to vary  depending on a measure of the query specificity. this measure  which we call query scope  is a hybrid probabilistic measure that depends on both collection statistics and the external conceptual structure provided by wordnet . it is based on the assumption that a generic query consists of terms that correspond to generic concepts in a conceptual hierarchy  and also that occur frequently in the collection. in the dynamic version of the spreading activation mechanism  which we call dynamic spreading activation  dsa   the query scope is used to adjust the effect of the rsv propagation  according to the assumption that generic queries may benefit more from the link structure analysis  and therefore from the propagationof a larger fraction of the rsvs between linked documents. during indexing  each term appearing in the collection is mapped to one or more concepts in wordnet and a probabilistic measure of the specificity of the term is calculated. during retrieval  the sum of the query term specificity measures  normalised by the length of the query  represents a probabilistic measure for the specificity of the query  which is used to refine the application of the spreading activation mechanism.
1 description of experiments
1 indexing
for indexing the collection  a standard stop word list is used and porter's stemming algorithm is applied. moreover  in all runs  except for uog1tad and uog1c  the documents are modified by doubling the occurrences of terms in titles and by adding to each document the anchor text of its incoming links. for the run uog1c  the documents are not modified  while for the run uog1tad  the inverted file is augmented with additional information on whether a term appears in the anchor text of a document or in its body. for all runs  the weighting formulas used for calculating the
rsvs are a variant of   which we call   except for runs uog1cta1dqh and uog1cta1  where the formula is used .
1 topic distillation
the static absorbing model  sam  is applied only in the run uog1ctaialh for the topic distillation task. in more details  the probability distribution of accessing the states of a modified markov chain obtained from the graph of the collection is calculated during indexing. we take into account only links between documents that belong to different domains. during retrieval  after forming the elite set  consisting of the top 1 retrieved documents  we calculate a new using a linear combination of the initially computed and the absorbing model's authority score :
 1 
official runprec. at 1prec. at 1prec. at 1average prec.featuresuog1ctaialh1111body-anchor-title  
sam  ssauog1ctadh1111body-anchor-title 
dam     ssauog1ctadqh1111body-anchor-title 
dam     dsauog1cta1dqh1111body-anchor-title  
dam     dsauog1tad1111body-anchor-title 
dam   table 1: topic distillation official results
	the parameters	and	were experimentally set to	and	respectively.
   the dam is applied in runs uog1ctadh  uog1ctadqh  uog1cta1dqh and uog1tad for the topic distillation task. after the elite set of documents is ranked according to the matching function used  the calculated are used as prior probabilities for the initialisation of the dam. this dynamic link analysis is applied on the set of the top ranked documents  ignoring the outlinks from the documents of the set   where . the values used in the official results for the sizes of sets and are respectively and .
   the spreading activation mechanism is applied for the topic distillation task  either statically for runs uog1ctaialh and uog1ctadh  or in a dynamic mode for runs uog1ctadqh and uog1cta1dqh  as a filter for re-ranking the results. the static version  ssa  consists of forming for each document in the elite set  the set of documents that are linked by it and that are placed deeper in the hierarchy of documents within the same site. the final for document is then calculated by using the following formula:
 1 
	the parameter	was experimentally set to	.
   the dynamic version  dsa  of the spreading activation mechanism replaces the parameter with the query scope  that is a measure of the specificity of the query. the equation 1 is then modified as follows:
 1 
   as mentioned above in section 1  for the run uog1tad  we use a different approach. having augmented the inverted file with information on whether the terms belong to the body of a document or to its anchor text  before the dam is applied  we remove from the results those documents for which no query terms occur in the associated anchor text. the obtained official results for the topic distillation task are given in table 1.
1 named page finding
for the named page finding task  proximity search is used only for the run uog1ctap. after retrieval is performed and the elite set is formed  proximity search is applied and the original of documents in which the query occurs as a phrase is multiplied by a parameter   as shown in the following equation:
 1 
official runaverage reciprocal
precisionnamed pages in top 1named pages not foundfeaturesuog1c11  1% 1  1% body only uog1cta11  1% 1  1% body-anchor-title uog1ctap11  1% 1  1% body-anchor-title 
proximity searchuog1cta1.1  1% 1  1% body-anchor-title uog1ctad11  1% 1  1% body-anchor-title 
dam   table 1: named page finding official results
unofficial runprec. at 1prec. at 1prec. at 1average prec.featuresunof1cta1111body-anchor-title unof1c1111body only unof1c1111body only unof1cd1111body only 
dam   unof1cdpr1111body only 
dynamic pagerank
 	 unof1cqe1111body only  query expansiontable 1: topic distillation unofficial results
	for the run uog1ctap the parameter	was set to	.
   for the run uog1ctad  the dam is applied as described in section 1. the sizes of the sets and were experimentally chosen to be and . they are smaller than the corresponding values chosen for the topic distillation task  reflecting the fact that there is only one  or two at most named pages for each query.
   the rest three runs  namely uog1c  uog1cta and uog1cta1 are variations of body only  or body and anchor indexing retrieval  using different retrieval methods. run uog1c uses body only indexing  while runs uog1cta and uog1cta1 use body and anchor indexing. moreover  runs uog1c and uog1cta use the retrieval method   while for the run uog1cta1 the method was applied. the obtained official results for the named page finding task are given in table 1.
1 analysis of results
this year  both tasks require a high early precision. the number of relevant documents for the topic distillation task is smaller than the numberof relevant documents found for the topic relevance task in trec 1. the named page finding task differs from the homepage finding task  because the named pages are not necessarily homepages.
   for the sake of completeness  once we received the evaluation data from trec  we ran several new unofficial experiments  see tables 1 and 1 .
   both official and unofficial results obtained from the conducted experiments  show that the content analysis is still the most important/efficient retrieval component. for example  in the topic distillation task  our content-only baseline  unofficial run unof1c  as shown in table 1  performs better than all our official runs  1 of prec.  1 obtained by run unof1c w.r.t. 1 obtained by
unofficial runaverage reciprocal
precisionnamed pages in top 1named pages not foundfeaturesunof1ctad11  1% 1  1% body only 
dam   unof1cqe11  1% 1  1% body only  query expansionunof1cta11  1% 1  1% body-anchor-title table 1: named page finding unofficial results
our best run  uog1tad . note here the application of the weighting scheme   which we found to clearly outperform others schemes mentioned in .
   to have a clear view of the importance of link analysis in topic distillation  we have tuned our link analysis model  the dam  runningseveral experimentswith differentvalues for the sets and . we have observed a slight improvement of precision at 1 documents and average precision with respect to the content only baseline using the dam  1 of prec.  1 obtained by run unof1cd w.r.t. 1 obtained by the pure content retrieval baseline  run unof1c  as shown in table 1 . this result was not achieved with the official runs.
   amongst the official runs  uog1tad was the best. performance difference between the official run uog1tad and the unofficial run unof1cd was due to the fact that in the official run  the use of the anchor and the title text was detrimental  the size of was too small for a precision  1 and the content retrieval model was different.
   we have also compared the dam to pagerank under the same experimental setting for the topic distillation task. pagerankis applied on the set of the top documentsand the outlinks of the top documents are ignored  where . results show that dam significantly outperforms pagerank for different values of and  e.g. run unof1cdpr w.r.t. run unof1cd in table 1 . moreover  pagerank seems to be detrimental for topic distillation  run unof1cdpr w.r.t. run unof1c in table 1 .
   we also achieve a slight improvement over the body-only indexing retrieval baseline for the named page finding task  run unof1ctad in table 1 w.r.t. run uog1c in table 1  by using our link analysis model  dam. although the improvement is marginal  and the sizes of the sets and on which the link analysis was applied are smaller than the corresponding sizes for the topic distillation task  this is an indication that our dynamic link analysis model may be applied for both tasks.
   an interesting issue that arises from the conducted experiments  concerns the use of anchor text duringretrieval. while for the named page finding task  employinganchortext significantly improves precision  run uog1cta w.r.t. run uog1c in table 1   for the topic distillation task precision decreases  run unof1c w.r.t. run unof1cta in table 1 .
   also  the query-biased spreading activation mechanism proposed seems to significantly improve results over the statically applied spreading activation  run uog1ctadqh w.r.t. run uog1ctadh in table 1   although the effectiveness is lower than that of our baseline. a possible reason for this is that the spreading activation mechanism was applied on the set of the 1 top ranked documents  where not all the links contained are useful and most of the documents are not relevant. therefore  additional refinements are needed  as well as an investigation on the size of the set of documents for which the spreading activation mechanism will prove to be effective. furthermore  we have noted that query expansion is detrimental for both tasks  run unof1cqe in table 1 for topic distillation and run unof1cqe in table 1 for named page finding .
   moreover  the conducted experiments show that the two tasks of the web track are intrinsically different. thus  different strategies are needed for each one  since what works best for one task is not necessary optimal for the other. first  the best results in the two tasks were obtained by using different weighting schemes  i.e. works better for topic distillation  unofficial run unof1c w.r.t. unofficial run unof1c in table 1   while performs the best in named page finding  official run uog1cta w.r.t. unofficial run unof1cta . second  we have provedthat while using anchor text improves precision for the named page finding task  it decreases performance in the topic distillation task.
   to conclude  for the topic distillation task  both body-only indexing and link analysis without anchors work well  whilst for the named page finding task body and anchor indexing also display promising results. furthermore  our results show that the potential application and usefulness of the link analysis still has to be explored  and we believe that performance improvement is feasible through refinement and better integration of the content and link analyses. as far as we know  even though content analysis is still a major component for effective retrieval  it is the first time that the results benefit from the application of pure link analysis for both tasks.
acknowledgments
this work is funded by a uk engineering and physical sciences research council  epsrc  grant  number gr/r1.
