   in trec 1  our experiments have been concentrated only on the topic distillation task. we first simply apply the term-based technique to the .gov web collection  and then re-rank the retrieval results using a link analysis algorithm in order to boost the retrieval precision. our link analysis has been inspired from the original pagerank  but focused on the web topic during the iterative score propagation. we hybridize the term-based retrieval scores with our link analysis approach. from the experiments  the results show that the combination of those scores still provides inadequate precision improvement.
1 introduction
the information retrieval focuses on the quality of result the users obtain. however  the traditional information retrieval methods give the dissatisfying results for the web collections as the queries the users enter are highly ambiguous. in order to increase the precision of the retrieval results  many techniques have been developed. link analysis is one of the techniques extensively used in web-ir community. hits  and pagerank  are the two well known algorithms that are developed based on link analysis technique  and widely studied by several trec participants  1  1  1  1  1 .
   hyperlinked-induced topic search  hits  has been developed by kleinberg and implemented in the clever project   while pagerank  is the core mechanism of the most successful search engine  google . both of these algorithms have different advantages and disadvantages. hits algorithm calculates a page score based on the the user's topic. however  hits must be computed on-line at query time. on the other hand  pagerank algorithm calculates a page score based on link relations. this calculation is done off-line only once  but the calculated scores are not related either to the topics of the web pages or to that the users are interested.
   for the trec 1  we introduce another off-line link analysis that allows the web topic to influence the propagation of link scores  called  topic-centric   tc  . analyzing the connectivity of the web graph in the same way as pagerank  tc algorithm iteratively propagates the portion of rank score of a
   source web page to the rank score of the destination one in accordance with the topics of both web pages. following the hyperlink  the destination web page will then appropriately receive a high rank score when the topic of the source web page is really referred to that of the destination one.
   the report is structured as follows. section 1 reviews briefly the pagerank algorithm. section 1 explains the new tc algorithm. section 1 shortly provides the experimental setup and results. finally  section 1 concludes the report.
1 basic pagerank algorithm
brin and page suggest a link-based search model called  pagerank  that evaluates the importance of each web page based on its citation pattern. the basic idea of pagerank is as follows. when a page u has a hyperlink to a page v  it is assumed that the author of the page u suggests the page v with some reasons  e.g.  related context  individual favor  or popular reference. pagerank employs this hint to compute the page scores. since it considers all web pages equally important  if we let nu be the number of pages which page u points out  and rank u  represent the rank score of a page u  then a hyperlink u ¡ú v confers 1/nu units of rank to page v.
   to compute the rank vector for all web pages  we then simply iteratively perform the following fixed-point computation. if we let bv represent the set of pages pointing to page v  for each iteration  the successive rank scores of pages are recursively propagated from the previously computed rank scores of all other pages pointing to them:
		 1 
   in general  the web graph is not strongly connected  and this may lead the pagerank computation of some pages to be trapped in a small isolated cluster of the web graph. this problem is usually resolved by pruning nodes with zero out-degree  and by adding random jumps to the random surfer process . this leads to the following modification of equation  1  to:
		 1 
where ¦Á  called  damping factor   is the value that we use to modify the transitional probability of the random surfer model of an underlying web graph.
1 web topic-centric algorithm
there is a big difference between pagerank and tc algorithms. pagerank treats every web page equally important. it iteratively propagates the link score from the source page to the destination one with the fraction of n1 where n is the amount of outbound links of the former. link score propagation with no regard to the web content  or the  topic  of that web page  may be inappropriate and independent to the user query. besides  our tc algorithm propagates link scores by considering the similarity between the topics of the source and destination pages.
   there are many ways to compute the page similarity  but we here only focus on the vector space approach . the vector space is widely used in many information retrieval researches. the basic idea of the vector space is to imagine a web page as a vector. each distinct word in that page is considered to be an axis of a vector in a space. the direction of a vector characterizes the content of a web page. here  we define wuv to be the page similarity score computed between the source page u and the destination page v  and calculate it using the following formula:
		 1 
where fku and fkv are the number of term k found in page u and page v  respectively. the rank of wuv value is between 1 and 1  and the similarity increases as this value increases.
   since tc does not consider web pages as being equally important  the portion of a rank score that propagates from a page u to a page v should be dependent on their page contents or topics. we then appropriately modify the fraction of link score propagation in equation  1  to:
		 1 
here  bv represents a set of pages pointing to v  ou represents a set of pages pointed by u  and wuv represents the similarity score computed between the content of the page v and the content of the in-link page u.
1 experimental setup and results
we use the lemur toolkit  as our vector space based retrieval system. we first process the .gov documents using bm1 weighting scheme  with parameters b = 1  k1 = 1 and k1 = 1  respectively. we only use the title section of the trec topic without any expansion  and examine the average retrieval precision at 1  1  1  1 and 1 retrieved documents. we hereafter call the result from this step  the  base  case. we then apply both tc and pagerank algorithms to compute the rank scores of web documents in the .gov collection  and employ those scores to re-rank the search results obtained from the base case. table 1 as follows provides the comparison between the average precision scores of the base case  the re-ranking results obtained from the tc  denoted by  tc    and those obtained from the pagerank  denoted by  pr    respectively.
table 1: the average precision scores.
retreived docsbasetcprat 1 docs111at 1 docs111at 1 docs111at 1 docs111at 1 docs111at 1 docs111avg precision1111 conclusion
like pagerank  tc algorithm analyzes the link connectivity  and pre-computes the rank scores of web pages. during the computation  tc propagates the portion of rank scores of the source web pages to the destination web pages in accordance with the topics found in both ends. therefore  we expect that the final computed rank scores will be more reasonable  and be more efficient to use to re-rank the search results obtained from the traditional vector space model.
   the study concluded from the trec experiments this year shows that tc algorithm does still not provide any significant improvement when it is used to re-rank the search results obtained from the standard vector space retrieval model. comparing with pagerank  tc algorithm however gives better re-ranking results in our experiments. more study and experiments will be conducted  e.g.  we will try several other vector space based weighting scheme in similarity computation  as well as the use of weighted inter-host and intra-host link score propagation.
