     in the course of carrying out nist trecs i created and tested a computer program for textual information searches  based on 'understanding' the meanings of words in texts. the computer using the program 'understands' not only the abstract  standardized meanings of the words in the text  but the specific  concrete meanings given to those words by the author s  of the texts. in this article i attempt to bring the language i used to create the algorithm of the program in line with the generally accepted  formalized language of mathematics.  doing this i must apply the philosophy and metaphysics of cynicism.  
 
axiom 1. words exist. 
definition 1. i understand a word in any given language to be a combination of letters in that format in which the word appears in print in a generally accepted dictionary of that language. that combination of letters by which the word is fixated in the dictionary is recognized as the 'normal form' of that word  to which all 'non-normal' forms of the given word can be reduced; by a 'non-normal' form of a word i mean a form which arises from adding prefixes  suffixes  endings  etc.  to the normal form of the word; or a form resulting from the introduction of a grammatical error into the word. 
　　use of the dictionary of a language allows one to present each word in numerical form. differential linguistics thus works with numbers; and the system for reducing non-normal forms of words to their normal forms can be seen as a system for reducing words to numbers. 
definition 1. the meaning of a word is how the word is used and what the word is. 
definition 1. any word taken separately in its normal form is a 'non-predicative definition'. i have called combinations of normal forms of words - nouns/pronouns-verbs-adjectives - 'predicative definitions'. 
note. noam chomsky. in 1 noam chomsky  proposed calling the combinations of words that convey the meaning of a sentence 'kernel sentences'. but i have preferred to follow an immeasurably more ancient tradition which had its beginning with 
aristotle  and to call such combinations 'predicative definitions'  if they are reduced to their normal forms.  
definition 1. i understand only the normal form of a word to be a non-predicative definition; where a non-predicative definition and 
an abstraction/universal  1; 'the world of universals'  are the same thing. 
i claim that any non-predicative definition has all words' meanings.  
clarification. philosophy. i have chosen  as an intellectual basis for my program  the philosophy of cynicism  which i see as superseding the philosophy of idealism. 
                                                           
acknowledgement. i thank dr.inna rozentsvit  nyu and member of the russian academy of medicinal sciences dr.gennady sukhikh for saving my life.  
also  i am immensely grateful to my friend aleksandr syrkin  who always helps me. without him this article could not be written. 
     i suppose that cynicism  as a collection of dogmas in written form  was originally created by the biblical authors ecclesiastes and jeremiah who  i think  were opposing plato. i consider cynicism to be based on the notion that the ideal is single  doesn't change and therefore doesn't exist in time - the  only  ideal exists only in the immutability of eternity  in timelessness. i am certain that idealists plato and  in some sense  aristotle - as well as their followers hegel  bradley and russell - supposed that there exists a multiplicity of ideals  that ideals exist in time and not in time and can be distinguished one from another  1 1 .  idealists have never explained how one could make distinctions between things that were the same - absolutely identical. i mean this: how one could make distinctions between two abstracts   1  hegel pretended that the question didn't exist - see his 'the science of logic': he supposed that nothing exists in time as well as beings.  
     having applied the concepts of cynicism to linguistics i have come to the aforementioned conclusion  stated in definition ″ 1  that the normal form of a word is the abstraction  - that is  it has an indefinitely large and in no way distinguishable number of meanings as long as the word hasn't been combined with other words and/or given a non-normal form.  
     for instance  a word 'ggffrrtte'. in its normal form it means everything and nothing at the same time - unless it is explained. hegel said about this phenomenon: '... pure being is the pure abstraction ... which when taken immediately  is equal nothing. from this... a definition of the absolute followed  that it is nothing... hence  the truth of being and nothing alike is the unity of both of them; this unity is becoming'  1  p.1 ' to posses a meaning of the word 'ggffrrtte' the word should become! i think that the inclusion of the normal form of a word into a structure in combination with other words and/or its modification into a non-normal form 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　1 transforms the  abstract  word into a concrete word with a concrete meaning through its becoming	. 
note. russell's non-predicative definition. bertrand russell introduced the notion of a 'non-predicative' definition  in which what is to be defined is brought in through its relation to a class of which it is an element  1 1 . for example: 'the set of all sets that are not elements of themselves'.  
     formally  linguistically  the given affirmation - 'the set of all sets that are not elements of themselves' - is a combination of sets of words in normal and non-normal form  intended to clarify the meaning of the word 'set'. the word 'set' by itself  however  in its normal form and not in combination with other words  can implicitly carry the meaning it has in 'the set of all sets that are not elements of themselves' together with many other meanings1. and the same with the word 'ggffrrtte' till it's explained! 
                                                           
1  'indeed no sooner have we distinguish the two words than it becomes necessary to consider their relations.'  1  p.1 . 1 . for example  the merriam-webster online dictionary gives the following list of meanings for the word 'set'  taken only as a noun: main entry: set 
function: noun 
1 a : the act or action of setting b : the condition of being set 
1 : a number of things of the same kind that belong or are used together  an electric train set  
1 a : mental inclination  tendency  or habit : bent  a set toward mathematics  b : a state of psychological preparedness usually of limited duration for action in response to an anticipated stimulus or situation  the influence of mental set on the effect experienced with marijuana  
1 : direction of flow  the set of the wind  
1 : form or carriage of the body or of its parts  her face took on a cynical set -- raymond kennedy  
1 : the manner of fitting or of being placed or suspended  in order to give the skirt a pretty set -- mary j. howell  1 : amount of deflection from a straight line  set of a saw's teeth  
1 : permanent change of form  as of metal  due to repeated or excessive stress 
1 : the act or result of arranging hair by curling or waving 
1 also sett /'set/ a : a young plant or rooted cutting ready for transplanting b : a small bulb  corm  or tuber or a piece of tuber used for propagation  onion sets  
1 or sett : the burrow of a badger 
1 : the width of the body of a piece of type 
1 : an artificial setting for a scene of a theatrical or film production 
1 also sett : a rectangular paving stone of sandstone or granite 
1 : a division of a tennis match won by the side that wins at least six games beating the opponent by two games or by winning a tiebreaker 
1 : a collection of books or periodicals forming a unit 
1 : a clutch of eggs 
1 : the basic formation in a country-dance or square dance 
1 : a session of music  as jazz or dance music  usually followed by an intermission; also : the music played at one session 
1 : a group of persons associated by common interests 
1 : a collection of elements and especially mathematical ones  as numbers or points  -- called also class 1 : an apparatus of electronic components assembled so as to function as a unit  a television set  
     to make an analogy with set theory: if it is given that the normal form of a word has a countable number of meanings n  then when that word is included in a combination of many words that set of meanings is reduced to the dimensions of its intersection with the sets of meanings of other words - to the set m  М   n  m is a subset of n  the power  number of elements  of m is less than or equal to the power of n .  
axiom 1. there exists a countable and limited number of parts of speech. 
definition 1. each part of speech explains not what the word is  but only how the word is used.  
any normal form of a word can belong to one or to several parts of speech. 
postulate 1. in most cases  it is only possible to identify the part of speech to which a given word belongs by analyzing the combination of the normal or non-normal form of the given word with the normal and/or non-normal forms of other words - with the given word present explicitly or implicitly in such combinations1. in a few cases one can identify the part of speech to which a given word belongs even without analyzing the combination of the normal and/or non-normal form of the given word with other words1. 
definition 1. words and their combinations always appear as parts of a sentence1  and sentences always form a paragraph1. 
axiom 1.  there is reality1. words  sentences and paragraphs are used for the describing of reality. 
     reality is everything that is and is not. also  i am not interested in whether the unicorn really lives or in how long its horn is: it is a part of reality  since reality is everything that is and is not  1 1 1.1 . 
postulate 1. reality is always and continuously changing. 
i am unaware of any unchanging reality. 
definition 1. context. i understand context to be the description of concrete  named parts of reality and of what happens to them. context can only be provided by a sum of combinations - always no less than one combination - of normal forms of words  extracted from a sentence of a paragraph of a text; where the normal form of words is arrived at by the reduction of non-normal forms to normal. moreover  such combinations must always conform to the structure of the following triad: substantive  noun   verb   adjective. 
definition 1. subtext. i understand subtext to be the description of unnamed and unnamable parts of reality and of what happens to reality and its parts. subtext can only be provided by a sum of combinations - always no less than one combination - of normal forms of words - combinations of no less than three parts of speech - pronoun  verb and adjective. 
     a method and system for extracting context and subtext from texts/paragraphs is described in the article 'the role and meaning of predicative and non-predicative definitions in the search for information' . the system consists of 
a 	the reduction of the non-normal forms of the words used in texts and paragraphs to their normal forms  
                                                                                                                                                                             
1 : a usually offensive formation in football or basketball 
1 : a group of a specific number of repetitions of a particular exercise 1  by the implicit presence of a word i mean that the word is not stated directly in a given combination but is implied to be. 1  such a word is usually a proper name or an appellation - a noun  although it could be any other part of speech. such a word has a set of meanings n which has no subsets; the power of n is equal to 1. 1 the merriam-webster online dictionary defines a sentence as follows: 
main entry: sen，tence  
function: noun 
1 a : a word  clause  or phrase or a group of clauses or phrases forming a syntactic unit which expresses an assertion  a question  a command  a wish  an exclamation  or the performance of an action  that in writing usually begins with a capital letter and concludes with appropriate end punctuation  and that in speaking is distinguished by characteristic patterns of stress  pitch  and pauses b : a mathematical or logical statement  as an equation or a proposition  in words or symbols 
1 the merriam-webster online dictionary presents the meaning of the word 'paragraph' as follows: 
main entry: par，a，graph  
function: noun 
1 a : a subdivision of a written composition that consists of one or more sentences  deals with one point or gives the words of one speaker  and begins on a new usually indented line b : a short composition or note that is complete in one paragraph 1 the merriam-webster online dictionary: 
main entry: re，al，i，ty  
function: noun 
1 : the quality or state of being real 
1 a  1  : a real event  entity  or state of affairs  his dream became a reality   1  : the totality of real things and events  trying to escape from reality  b : something that is neither derivative nor dependent but exists necessarily - in reality : in actual fact 
b 	and the compilation of the combinations of those words within the sentences of texts and paragraphs.  
the method thus consists of the summarization of the combinations of normal forms of words found in texts and paragraphs 
 taken as sums of sentences  in order to establish the contexts and subtexts of texts and their paragraphs  see us patent ″ 1 1 . 
     i am certain that the context and subtext of a paragraph provide a very limited set r of meanings for every word used in the paragraph  where r   m  r is a subset of m which has a power less than or equal to that of m  where r   М   n . 
definition 1. a paragraph is devoted to the description of a limited number of parts of reality: a paragraph  as distinct from the sentences that compose it  must in the overwhelming majority of cases have an absolutely simultaneously defined context and subtext  which allow one in most cases to understand without ambiguity the meaning of the words used in the paragraph.  
     if a paragraph does not have a simultaneously defined context and subtext  it means that an error has crept into the paragraph and/or it should be linked to  an other paragraph s  of the text.  
observation 1. context and subtext can only be provided by a sentence  a paragraph  or a text. 
note to observation 1. in order to provide context and subtext one needs a minimum of one combination of normal forms of words. such a combination of normal and/or non-normal forms of words is a sentence. and a paragraph and a text are a sum of some/many sentences.  
observation 1. it is not always possible to determine to which part of speech a word belongs by examining only one single sentence in which it is explicitly or implicitly present.  
note to observation 1. a sentence may consist of only one word which is neither a proper name nor an appellation - i.e.  it is what i call a 'single-part sentence'. in that case it is impossible to examine the combination of words that would allow one to identify the part of speech to which the word belongs  since there is no combination of words in the sentence. 
     for example  if someone creates the sentence  'red'  one cannot tell to which part of speech the word used in the sentence belongs. 'red' could refer to a colour  or be a pejorative term for a communist  or it could be a proper name or an alias. in the first case the word 'red' would be an adjective  in the others it would be a noun. 
observation 1. the definition of how a word is used - to which part of speech it belongs - is most often made possible by an examination of the paragraph in which the word is used. 
note to observation 1. indeed  since a paragraph is a set of sentences - no less then one sentence - then a paragraph makes it possible to define the part of speech to which a word belongs. 
the function of the description of reality. description in words is dependent on changing reality.  
     i have come to the conclusion that as reality changes the description of it always and inescapably changes as well  reflecting the changing of reality itself. for example  if someone dropped a cup of tea on the floor and it broke  spilling the tea  then a description of the broken cup and the spilled tea would be entirely different from a description of the cup before it fell on the floor. 
     moreover  out of the given set of all possible subjective descriptions of reality e  one can relate to described reality - let's call it x - only one subjective description of reality  designated as y=f x . one can then say that for the set of descriptions of reality e  a function of description of reality is provided in the terms 
y = f x   х （ Е 
where e is the field of subjective definition  the set of all possible states of reality. 
postulate 1. only subjective descriptions of reality exist. 
note. subjectivism1. the function of description of reality in words is always subjective  since only a subject  the observer  is in a position to describe reality in words. in any case  i am unaware of any descriptions of reality created directly or indirectly by an object  and not by a subject. i am certain that even if objects exist that are capable of describing reality in words  they were created and/or taught to describe reality by a human being. 
     the function of the description of reality can be provided analytically  if one considers proven the hypothesis of the presence in every subject of an individual and limited set of lexical habits   the existence of which is determined simultaneously by the 
                                                           
1 the merriam-webster online dictionary: 
main entry: sub，jec，tiv，ism  function: noun 
1 a : a theory that limits knowledge to subjective experience b : a theory that stresses the subjective elements in experience. 
aesthetic and ethical components  of the subject's mind. indeed  if one knows which words and combinations thereof must inescapably be used by the subject in describing reality  and its parts   one can analytically provide the function of description of reality by the given subject. for this one must know 
1. the subject's emotional relation to reality and its parts; knowledge of which is transmitted by the ethical component of the 
 subject's mind  
1. and it is also necessary to know about the subject's own knowledge of reality and its parts: this knowledge is the aesthetic 
 component of the subject's mind.  
clarification. words have only subjective meanings.  
note. grammar. in order to extract/reproduce the meaning of the subjective function of description of reality at a given moment of time in the form of combinations of normal and non-normal forms of words grammatically coordinated in sentences and paragraphs  that is  in the form of a text  it is necessary to have an understanding of the laws of grammar. at the present moment i don't have that necessary understanding of grammar. 
note. the ancients. i take the limit of the function of description of reality to be silence  following in this the teaching of the ancient the pre-platonic pythagoreans and hebrews.  i consider plato and aristotle  as well as ecclesiastes and jeremiah  to have been the heirs of the pythagoreans. or  pythagoras and the pre-platonic pythagoreans were the heirs of ecclesiastes  and  perhaps  jeremiah   i don't know.  
definition 1. the limit of the function of description of reality is silence - the absence of the description of reality. in other words  i consider the function of description of reality to be a differentiable function for which a limit can be defined. indeed  there exists a derivative function of description of reality y'=f' x : it is the limit of the relation of changes in the description of reality to reality itself. if the changes in reality are vanishingly small  then the changes in the description of reality are vanishingly small. if reality does not change  then the description of reality does not change. 
	y' = 	 f' x  =  	lim dx/dy = 	 lim f x + Δx  - f x   
                              Δx★1                       Δx★1          Δx 
where dx designates changes in reality   where dy designates changes in the function of description of reality. 
in other words  if reality is unchanging  there is no function of description of reality: it has attained its limit in silence. 
observation 1. the function of description of reality is continuous. 
note to observation 1. in response to the slightest change in reality the function of description of reality changes slightly but inescapably. since reality - the argument of the function - is always and continuously changing  then the function of its description is always and continuously changing. the same: it is enough to scoop up some water from the atlantic ocean in a glass for the description of the ocean to change at once  however insignificantly. 
     i base the following speculations on my unshakable certainty that a human being can operate only in terms of the derivatives from the function of description of reality  divided by parameters1. by analogy with mathematics  where the derivative of a function is established on a point  i establish the derivative of the function of description of reality in an instant of time. 
postulate 1. the second derivatives from the function of description of reality are discrete. 
definition 1. a derivative from the function of description of reality. i understand a derivative from the function of description of reality to be descriptions of reality as reality changes striving for a minimum  in an infinitely small interval of time. 
definition 1. the first derivative from the function of description of reality.  the first derivative from the function of description of reality is the normal form of  a  noun s  describing changes in reality in an infinitely small interval of time.  
definition 1. the second derivative from the function of description of reality. the second derivative from the function of description of reality is a paragraph. 
note. time. time  as i conceive it  is a parameter used by the subject to divide continuity into fragments for description - into a countable  discrete  number of descriptions. in the article 'lexiclone inc. and nist trec' i supposed that reality exists in eternity and truth exists in infinity - where eternity is closed/completed time  and infinity is continuing time . this means that taking an interval of time as a parameter allows one to describe reality in terms of a finite set of descriptions. but truth  by reason of its incompletion  cannot be described in terms of a finite set of  discrete  descriptions.  future cannot be predicted.  
     but it is precisely time which creates the parametric link between the function of describing reality and reality itself  time which parametrically sets the function of describing reality in relation to the function of change in reality itself. 
definition 1. the prototype at the integration of a paragraph into the first derivative from reality. a group of verbs and adjectives is that part of a prototype which appears and is displayed when a paragraph is integrated into the first derivative from 
reality1.  
the meaning of a word. the prototype of a paragraph gives one a sufficient and necessary understanding of a word's meaning - of how the word is used and what the word is. given below is a small fragment of the prototype for the preceding paragraph which illuminates the meaning of all the words in the paragraph. 
reality - paragraph - derivative reality - part - derivative  reality - form - derivative  reality - result - derivative  reality - be - derivative  description - paragraph - derivative  description - part - derivative  description - form - derivative  description - result - derivative  description - be - derivative  function - paragraph - derivative  function - part - derivative  function - form - derivative  function - result - derivative  function - be - derivative  reality - paragraph - first  reality - paragraph - into  reality - paragraph - integrated  reality - part - first  reality - part - into  reality - part - integrated  reality - form - first  reality - form - into  reality - form - integrated  reality - result - first  reality - result - into  reality - result - integrated  reality - be - first  reality - be - into  reality - be - integrated  
     i am certain that the meaning of a word can be understood only if the paragraph provides frequent repetition of a predicative definition containing that word. sometimes a single paragraph may not contain any repetition of the predicative definition which conveys the relevant meaning of a word. in that case it is necessary to read several paragraphs - before and/or after the given one - to provide enough repetitions of the same predicative definition  which will allow one to understand the relevant meaning of the word. 
     it means that if a person  and my program as well  begins reading a text from its end  it could be necessary to somehow establish the context and subtext of what was in the book earlier  in order to understand the meanings of the words. one  and my program as well  can only gain such knowledge by reading further and/or going back a few pages/paragraphs.  
definition 1. summary. the prototype of the second derivative from the function of describing i call 'summary'. a summary is a sum of lexical habits. 
nist trec qa. for nist trec qa i worked out a methodology of text paragraph fusion and subsequent restoration of the 
sentences of the paragraphs.  
     paragraph fusion consists in uniting several paragraphs of a text that are linked contextually and/or subtextually and/or mechanically. restoration of the sentences of the paragraphs - by context - is generally achieved by adding the predicative definition 'it-be-in' to all the sentences needing restoration.  
paragraph fusion. if a single paragraph of a text does not provide a trustworthy - that is  identical - understanding of the 'generally accepted' slang used at its creation1 - usually because the paragraph lacks even one complete predicative definition1 - then in order to understand the meanings of the words of that paragraph it is necessary to be acquainted with the preceding and/or following and/or other paragraph s  of the text. in other words  an 'untrustworthy' paragraph of this kind is linked contextually and/or subtextually and/or mechanically to  an other paragraph s  of the text.  for example  if a paragraph consists of only one monosyllabic sentence  containing only one word  then that paragraph can necessarily be fused with the preceding paragraph. the same procedure may be necessary if the paragraph is part of a dialogue and begins with a hyphen  quotation mark . it is also necessary to fuse sentences that represent a question and answer in the text - a kind of crossword. and so on in the same vein.   
     by fusing paragraphs of text my program creates paragraphs containing summaries of predicative definitions necessary to understanding the meanings of the words in them - paragraphs created within the framework of a certain 'generally accepted' slang.  restoration of sentences of paragraphs. monosyllabic sentences/sentences lacking  even one  full predicative definition can and must be restored  after necessary  preliminary paragraph fusion .  
     monosyllabic sentences are  usually  almost always  sentences that deal with reality. in other words  they contain either a question or an affirmation about something finished - that is  about what was  is  or will be.  in my article 'lexiclone inc. and nist trec'  i affirm that reality exists in completed times . i thus have all the necessary grounds to add to monosyllabic sentences the predicative definition 'it-be-in'  as:  
a  containing in itself an affirmation that the abstract 'it' was  is  or will be:   
b  having in its structure the most frequently recurring words in the summary of any text  almost any paragraph and almost all 
 sentences: the verb 'be' and the adjective  preposition  'in'.  nist trec is interested exclusively in the retrieval of contextual information  since before the publication of my article  there was no awareness of even the existence of the subtext. in the case where a search by subtext would be needed i would add the predicative definition 'i-be-in'.   
　　by restoring sentences my program recreates sentences that contain tautological1 answers to queries put in the course of nist trec qa. in addition to sentence restoration and paragraph fusion a number of other steps must also be taken to find answers to nist trec qa queries.  
note. lexical clone. as i stated earlier in my article  my program seeks an answer to a query in the aquant collection of texts after having already found one in a smaller and specific database in a text created in the 'generally accepted' slang of the query. 
moreover:  
1  having found an answer to a nist trec qa query in the smaller and specific database    
1  the program extracts from the summary of the predicative definitions of such a text a small number of predicative 
 definitions that are tautological to the given query  and that in fact already contain the answer to the query in the format that nist trec qa requires  a single word or very few words . then my program seeks in the aquant collection a sentence with  again  predicative definitions that are tautological to the ones already found in the smaller and specific database.  
