in the biological domain  to extract the newly discovered functional features from massive literature is a major challenging issue.  to automatically annotate generif in a new literature is the main goal in this paper.  we try to find function words and introducers in the training corpus  and then apply such informative words to annotate the generif.  the experiments showed that 1%  1%  1%  and 1% for the measure of classic dice  modified unigram dice  modified bigram dice  and modified bigram dice phrases.  after applying svm learning mechanism combing new weighting scheme and position information  we get much better performance. 
1 introduction 
information explosion in molecular biology and biomedicine is evolving rapidly  and becomes one of challenging problems in the new information era.  how to obtain relevant information  for example  gene/protein functions  from a large amount of data collection is indispensable for bioinformatics researchers and experts.  in the past  researchers in biomedicine have already constructed large scale of databases such as umls   gene ontology   swissprot   genbank   dip   snomed   and locuslink  etc.  which are useful for researches to capture and organize information.  however  creating and maintaining the knowledge bases requires enormous work.  for example  if the paper includes a sentence like  probably exist a binding between gene x and gene y   we cannot assert that the paper is related to the molecular function.  thus  it needs careful judgment to add new information into a knowledge base.  in other words  if we want to retrieve the relevant data from the massive literatures automatically  it needs a lot of efforts. 
¡¡medline is a massive biomedical corpus for information extraction and knowledge discovery.  biomedical experts explore new development of some special topics by retrieving relevant documents from medline through search engines or information retrieval  ir  systems.  these systems only return documents satisfying users' information needs instead of locating the relevant sentences denoting the specific functions.  for example  during exploring molecular functions  users have to go through the whole documents to find the relevant information  and align it to a suitable database entry.  to solve the above problem  some efforts have been made to extract functional relations  1  1  1  1  1 .  those only extract protein or gene interactions rather than the whole functions in the text. 
