the multimedia and information systems group at the knowledge media institute of the open university participated in the expert search task of the enterprise track in trec 1. we have proposed to address three main innovative points in a two-stage language model  which consists of a document relevance model and a cooccurrence model  in order to improve the performance of expert search. the three innovative points are based on characteristics of documents. first  document authority in terms of their pageranks is considered in the document relevance model. second  document internal structure is taken into account in the co-occurrence model. third  we consider multiple levels of associations between experts and query terms in the co-occurrence model. our experiments on the trec1 expert search task show that addressing the above three points has led to improved effectiveness of expert search on the w1c dataset. 
1. introduction 
the aim of this year's expert search is to find w1c people in the expert candidate list who are the best matches for a user's specific expertise request on a topic. for example  a user is looking for an expert  who has knowledge in relationship cardinalities between roles in different choreographies . the expertise request is often complex and needs to be converted into queries for ir systems to process. taking a starting query as the input  query expansion and formulation methods can generate more precise and informative queries for better retrieval results.  
in last year expert search task  several systems have followed a language modeling approach and have consistently achieved good results  1  1 . thus we have also adopted the two-stage language model approach. the two-stage language model consists of a document relevance model and a co-occurrence model. first  the document relevance model finds documents which are relevant to the expertise topic. second  a co-occurrence model is used to find experts who are closely related to the expertise topic based on the assumption that if an expert's identity  such as his/her name  email address  user id  cooccurs with the terms of a query describing the topic in a text window  the expert is likely to be related to the topic. 
we have proposed three innovative points to improve the two-stage language model approach. 
first  google has used pageranks of documents to combine with content-based document relevance in finding authoritative documents on a query  and has greatly improved the user's search experience on the web. we think that document authority should be taken into account in the document relevance model as well. by doing so  experts from these authorities can be correctly identified. 
