we consider the setting of lazy random graph walks over directed graphs  where entities are represented as nodes and typed edges represent the relations between them. this framework has been used in a variety of problems to derive an extended measure of entity similarity. in this paper we contrast two different approaches for applying supervised learning in this framework to improve graph walk performance: a gradient descent algorithm that tunes the transition probabilities of the graph  and a reranking approach that uses features describing global properties of the traversed paths. an empirical evaluation on a set of tasks from the domain of personal information management and multiple corpora show that reranking performance is usually superior to the local gradient descent algorithm  and that the methods often yield best results when combined.
categories and subject descriptors
h.1  information systems : database applications- data mining; h.1 : information search and retrieval-
retrieval models  search process
general terms
algorithms  experimentation
keywords
entity relation graphs  learning  personal information management
1. introduction
　relational structured data as well as semi-structured data is naturally represented by an entity-relation  er  graph schema  where nodes represent entities and directed typed edges represent the relations between them. such graphs are heterogenous  in the sense that they include different types of nodes  and different types of links. examples of
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
joint 1th webkdd and 1st sna-kdd workshop '1  webkdd/snakdd'1   august 1  1  san jose  california  usa.
copyright 1 acm 1-1-1 ...$1.
entity-relation graphs include citation networks where the nodes consist of authors  papers  institutions  journals  and conferences  e.g.   ; these networks can be viewed also as rich social networks  where persons are interconnected via their relation to other entities  explicitly represented in the graph  e.g.  persons may participate in the same conferences  coauthor papers etc. . other examples of heterogenous social networks are the internet movie database where nodes representing persons  actors  directors  etc.  are interconnected via a diverse set of relations to other entities such as movies and studios  e.g.   ; in the domain of homeland security  affiliation networks that include diverse sets of persons and events interlinked in a variety of relationships are used for predicting threat vulnerabilities  e.g.   . recently  it has been suggested to represent personal management information as entity-relation graphs  in which email messages  meeting entries  persons  email addresses  text and date nodes are interconnected via relations derived from the textual and structural information residing in a personal work station or a corporate database  1  1 .
　given an er graph  a question of interest is how to determine the nature of relationship between two entities that are not directly connected in the graph  e.g.  how to recognize the relationship advisor-of between person entities that are connected only indirectly  e.g.  via links to coauthored paper entities . it has been suggested to construct a subgraph consisting of the shortest paths between two nodes for relationship detection . researchers have pointed out that the search for such extended semantic relations can be improved given knowledge about which link types in the graph are relevant for the relationship of interest .
　in this paper we consider an extended similarity metric in entity-relation graphs based on lazy random graph walks. given the networked data model and some initial distribution over graph nodes  a similarity  or relatedness  score of a node is defined as the probability of reaching that node in a random walk process  1  1  1  1  1  1  1 . this paradigm is closely related to the pagerank algorithm  and its  personalized  variants  e.g.    that are based on a graph walk of infinite length with random resets.  in a  personalized  pagerank these resets are biased towards a distribution of iterest.  in a lazy graph walk  there is a fixed probability of halting the walk at each step. this halting probability means that short walks will be more probable  as it reduces the probability of reaching nodes distant from the starting points of the walk. rather than modeling centrality  of nodes  as in the pagerank algorithm   a lazy graph walk can be viewed as propagating  similarity  from a start node through edges in the graph-incidentally accumulating evidence of similarity over multiple connecting paths. this similarity metric can be viewed as a tool for performing search across the nodes in the graph. the result of the graph walk is a list of graph nodes  ranked by their probability mass cumulated in the graph walk process.
　in a previous work  lazy random walks over graphs have been used for estimating word dependency distributions: in this case  the constructed graph represented different flavors of word-to-word similarity. other papers have also used lazy walks over graphs for query expansion  1  1 . recently  this approach has been shown to be effective for contextual search and disambiguation in email processing tasks   as well as for protein name disambiguation
.
　typically  the individual transitions in the random walk are determined by a set of parameters  assigning a fixed weight for each edge type  relation  in the graph  designating its relevancy or importance. as mentioned above  it is reasonable that a particular subset of link types be relevant for extraction of semantic relations between nodes that are not directly linked in the graph. furthermore  different edge types may have varying importance in the context of different types of queries  e.g.  recognizing different relationships like advisor-of versus spouse-of . this suggests the goal of learning the graph edge weights for a particular class of queries  such that probability propagated by the graph walk is directed to those nodes that demonstrate the relation of interest. several schemes have been suggested for adjusting the set of edge weights using hill-climbing methods  which proved successful in personalized pagerank settings  see section 1 . a different approach suggested recently learns to re-order an initial ranking  using features describing the edges in the traversed graph paths  1  1 . this method parameterizes the graph walk with a set of representative features  and thus loses some information; however  such features allow one to capture certain global properties of the graph walk. for example  they allow considering edge sequences that are encountered in traveling from the source nodes to a target node. the graph walks and the algorithms which tune the graph edge weights  on the other hand  are based on  local  information  where only information about the next immediate step of the walk is accessible. given this qualitative difference  the focus of this paper is to conduct an empirical evaluation of the two approaches for a shared set of tasks  using authentic data. we will show that reranking is in many cases a preferable alternative to direct weight learning. however  the two approaches are complementary  usually yielding improvements in performance when combined.
　the paper proceeds as follows. in the next section we review related research. we then describe the lazy random walk framework and each of the learning approaches in detail. in the empirical evaluation section  we describe a set of tasks from the personal information management domain; we then give the results of applying a weight tuning algorithm and reranking separately  and in combination  on these tasks  for multiple real-world corpora. the paper concludes with a discussion of the results and possible future directions.
1. related work
