we discuss technology to help a person monitor changes in news coverage over time. we de뫩ne temporal summaries of news stories as extracting a single sentence from each event within a news topic  where the stories are presented one at a time and sentences from a story must be ranked before the next story can be considered. we explain a method for evaluation  and describe an evaluation corpus that we have built. we also propose several methods for constructing temporal summaries and evaluate their effectiveness in comparison to degenerate cases. we show that simple approaches are effective  but that the problem is far from solved.
keywords
summarization  experimental design and metrics
1. introduction
모we are interested in methods that help a person monitor changes in news coverage over time. we assume that a user has access to a stream of news stories that are on the same topic  but that the stream 뫧ows rapidly enough that no one has the time to look at every story. in this situation  a person would prefer to be kept up-to-date on the events within the topic  and to dive into the details only when the reported events trigger enough interest.
모the usage model that we envision requires that the technology produce a revised summary at regular time intervals-e.g.  every hour or at the start of each day. it is neither possible nor meaningful to wait until the topic is done to produce a summary. nor does it make sense to produce an up-to-date overall summary at every time interval: the summary must indicate only what has changed. after all  the user has already been informed about everything that happened earlier.
모for this study  we assume that news topics can be broken into a sequence of events  and that it is those events that interest users. in that case  it is suf뫩cient for a system to produce a list of the events within the topic in the order those events are reported. better summaries will list the events in the order reported  will capture all of the events  will avoid listing off-topic material as if it were an
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
sigir'1  september 1  1  new orleans  louisiana  usa.
copyright 1 acm 1-1/1 ...$1.
event  will avoid repeated mention of events  and will provide clear descriptions of events.
모in the remainder of this study  we describe our efforts toward generating and evaluating temporal summaries that meet many of those criteria. we start by reviewing some related work on summarization and topic threading. in section 1 we formalize the problem suf뫩ciently that it can be evaluated. section 1 proposes several methods for addressing the problem and presents an evaluation of those methods. we conclude in section 1 and discuss possible directions for this research.
1. related work
모this research has its roots in text summarization  topic detection and tracking  and time-based summarization techniques. the following sections discuss work that is related to that discussed in this paper.
1 summarization
모the core technique of this temporal summarization research is to summarize a body of texts by extracting sentences that have particular properties. this work falls into a long tradition of sentence extraction  starting in the late 1's with h.p. luhn's classic work  and continuing forward . such techniques consider the words in the sentences  look for cue words and phrases  1  1   consider even more focused features such as sentence length and case of words   or compare patterns of relationships between sentences . most of these approaches use statistics from the corpus itself to decide on the importance of sentences  and some leverage existing training sets of summaries to learn the properties of a summary  1  1  1 .
모summarization techniques leverage a wide range of natural language processing  nlp  and discourse information. some focus primarily on techniques that have been developed in information retrieval   while most try to leverage both ir approaches and some aspects of nlp .
모of course  not all summaries are merely extracts. some of the work already mentioned pieces together summaries from more than just sentences. other work attempts to generate the summary directly  either from a knowledge-based representation of the content or from a statistical model of the text  1  1 .
모some summarization efforts have been focused on news stories or events. maybury's work on event data  is different than this work because he was focused on events from simulations or application data rather than on events within news topics. other work on news summarization  including work that uses the tdt corpora  focuses on single or multi-document summarization  1  1  1  of the stories  without attempting to capture the changes over time. note that most multi-document summarization systems have to include time as a component of their system to consolidate information across stories  e.g.  to decide which statement is more up-to-date .
모the use of maximal marginal relevance  mmr  for summarization  is strongly related to the ideas in this paper. it shares the idea of balancing novelty and usefulness   relevant novelty    but focuses on query-based summarization of a static collection of stories.
모this work is unlike most summarization research in its focus on summarizing changes over time. comparative summaries of multiple documents  could conceivably address this problem  but we do not know of any that have.
1 topic detection and tracking
모this work also arises out of topic detection and tracking  tdt   a body of research and an evaluation paradigm that addresses eventbased organization of broadcast news. tdt investigation has been carried out over 뫩ve years by about a dozen academic and industrial research institutions  and explored in the context of four  cooperatively competitive  evaluations sponsored by the u.s. government  1  1  1  1 . the problems tackled by tdt are all story-based rather than sentence based. in many ways  the temporal summarization problem is an event- and sentence-level analogue of tdt's  뫩rst story detection  problem  where the task is to identify the 뫩rst story that discusses each topic in the news.
1 time-based summarization
