we describe an approach for extracting semantics of tags  unstructured text-labels assigned to resources on the web  based on each tag's usage patterns. in particular  we focus on the problem of extracting place and event semantics for tags that are assigned to photos on flickr  a popular photo sharing website that supports time and location  latitude/longitude  metadata. we analyze two methods inspired by well-known burst-analysis techniques and one novel method: scale-structure identification. we evaluate the methods on a subset of flickr data  and show that our scale-structure identification method outperforms the existing techniques. the approach and methods described in this work can be used in other domains such as geo-annotated web pages  where text terms can be extracted and associated with usage patterns.
categories and subject descriptors: h.1.m  models and principles : miscellaneous
general terms: algorithms  measurement
keywords: tagging systems  event identification  place identification  tag semantics  word semantics
1. introduction
　user-supplied  tags   textual labels assigned to content  have been a powerful and useful feature in many social media and web applications  e.g. flickr  del.icio.us  technorati . tags usually manifest in the form of a freely-chosen  short list of keyword associated by a user with a resource such as a photo  web page  or blog entry. unlike category- or ontology-based systems  tags result in unstructured knowledge - they have no a-priori semantics. however  it is precisely the unstructured nature of tags that enables their utility. for example  tags are probably easier to enter than picking categories from an ontology; tags allow for greater

 
also affiliated with uc berkeley  computer science dept.
 
also affiliated with uc berkeley school of information.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
sigir'1  july 1  1  amsterdam  the netherlands.
copyright 1 acm 1-1-1/1 ...$1.
flexibility and variation; and tags may naturally evolve to reflect emergent properties of the data.
　the information challenge facing tagging systems is to extract structured knowledge from the unstructured set of tags. despite the lack of ontology and semantics  patterns and trends emerge that could allow some structured information to be extracted from tag-based systems  1  1  1 . while complete semantic understanding of tags associated with individual resources is unlikely  the ability to assign some structure to tags and tag-based data will make tagging systems more useful.
　broadly  we are interested in the problem of identifying patterns in the distribution of tags over some domain; in this work we focus on spatial and temporal patterns. specifically  we are looking at tags on flickr   a popular photosharing web site that supports user-contributed tags and geo-referenced  or  geotagged  photos. based on the temporal and spatial distributions of each tag's usage  we attempt to automatically determine whether a tag corresponds to a  place  and/or  event   see section 1 for definitions . for example  the tag bay bridge1 should be identified as a place  and sigir1 should be identified as an event. tag usage distributions are derived from associated photos' metadata. while the correctness of the time and location metadata for each individual photo is suspect   in large numbers  trends and patterns can be reliably extracted and used  1  1 .
　extraction of event and place semantics can assist many different applications in the photo retrieval domain and beyond  including:
  improved image search through inferred query semantics;
  automated creation of place and event gazetteer data that can be used  for example  to improve web search by identifying relevant spatial regions and time spans for particular keywords;
  generation of photo collection visualizations by location and/or event/time;
  support for tag suggestions for photos  or other resources  based on location and time of capture;
  automated association of missing location/time metadata to photos  or other resources  based on tags or caption text.
in this work we do not apply our analysis to a specific application  but rather investigate the feasibility of automatically determining event/place semantics for flickr tags.
　this paper represents  to our knowledge  the first attempt to extract place and event semantics for tags. accordingly  we are exploring a number of possible methods. we introduce a new method tailored to event and place identification  scale-structure identification  and demonstrate how this method outperforms methods borrowed from other domains.
　furthermore  we note that our general approach to semantics extraction  and the methods we present as instantiations of this approach  can be applied to any information sources with temporal and spatial encodings from which we can extract textual terms - like georss blog data and geoannotated web pages or wikipedia articles. additionally  the general approach of analyzing a distribution of occurrences over a domain  in our case space and time  to infer semantics could be extended to other metadata domains like color  hue/saturation   visual features  audio features  and text/semantic features.
to summarize  the contributions of this paper are:
  a generalizeable approach for extracting tag semantics based on the distribution of individual tags;
  the modification  application  and analysis of existing methods to the problem of event and place identification for tag data;
  scale-structure identification - a new method for extracting patterns from usage data;
  a practical application of these methods to extract event and place semantics from tags associated with geotagged images on flickr.
　we formally define our problem in section 1. then we describe the methods  section 1  and report on our evaluation  section 1 . we begin by reviewing the related work.
1. related work
　we address related work from a number of relevant research areas  including: event detection in time-stamped data such as web queries and personal photo collections; location-based analysis of spatially distributed data such as gps positions  demographics information  or even information on the web; and analysis of tagging systems.
　many scientific domains have studied the general problem of time-based event detection. time series analysis techniques such as arima  1  1  analyze trends in time series data with the goals of  1  explaining spikes and valleys over various time windows and  1  producing future trend forecasts. in particular  our na： ve scan methods  see section 1  are similar to previous work on global event detection in web query logs  and access logs  where events are semantically defined as  bursts   cf.  .
　more germane to this paper is the problem of event identification in personal photo collections  1  1  1 . a key characteristic of the personal photo collection domain is the general assumption of  a single camera   which reduces event identification to a problem of temporal segmentation. events are considered to be a single segment of time over which a single activity was taking place  providing a coherent  unifying context. prior work on this problem has applied a number of techniques: some rely primarily on time   others use both locations and times  1  1   and another looks at the text annotation associated with photos . this type of event-identification is different than ours since  1  we consider multi-person collections of photos and  1  we are interested in whether tags describe events  not whether a segment of time refers to a specific event for a specific person.
　related to event identification is the extraction of meaningful information from location-based data. recent efforts in ubiquitous computing systems identify meaningful locations and places for gps and other location tracking technologies . in epidemiology  efforts to identify and localize disease outbreaks  are closely related to the place identification problem we address in this paper. specifically  we borrow some techniques from the disease/outbreak analysis  where data is sparse and dependent on the underlying population statistics  as these two properties are echoed in our data for each tag.
　more semantically-rich location analysis problems have been studied in the domain of web-based information retrieval. specifically  the field of  geoir  has had two thrusts relevant to this paper. first  attempts were made  e.g.  1  1  1   at extracting geographic information for a web page  based on the page links and network properties  as well as geographic terms that appear on the page. our system described here could potentially help these systems by identifying additional geographic terms and defining their spatial scope. the second related research effort in geoir focused on extracting the scope of geographic terms or entities based on co-occurring text and derived latitude-longitude information  1  1 . with geo-annotated photos and tags  as well as any system with direct location annotation  the potential exists not only to delineate known geographic terms  but also to identify new regions of interest based on the data.
　tagging systems in general have been of increasing research interest. most of the prior research has looked at describing tagging systems   or studying trends and properties of various systems . some efforts have looked at extracting ontologies  or  structured knowledge  from tags  - a similar goal to ours  yet using co-occurrence and other text-based tools that could augment the methods analyzed in this paper.
　more directly related to this paper are research efforts that analyzed flickr tags  and other term associated with flickr photos  together with photo location and time metadata  1  1 . these projects applied ad-hoc approaches to determine
 important  tags within a given region of time  or space  based on inter-tag frequencies. however  no determination of the properties or semantics of specific tags was provided. naaman et al. created spatial models for terms appearing in geo-referenced photograph labels   but did not detect the location properties of specific terms.
1. problem definition
　in this section  we provide a formal definition of our data and research problem. our dataset includes two basic elements: photos and tags. each geotagged photo has  in addition to other metadata  an associated location and time. the location  `p   consisting of latitude-longitude coordinates  associated with photo p generally marks where the photo was taken; but sometimes marks the location of the photographed object. the time  tp  associated with photo p generally marks the photo capture time; but occasionally refers to the time the photo was uploaded to flickr. both location and time are recorded at high resolution  microseconds of degrees for location  seconds for time .
　tags are the second basic element type in our dataset. we use the variable x to denote a tag. note that each photo can have multiple tags associated with it  and each tag is often associated with many photos. based on the locations and times associated with photos  we can define the location
                                                                 1 and time usage distributions for each tag x: lx = {`p | p is
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　1 associated with x} and tx = {tp | p is associated with x}. using this data we address the following problem:
   can time and place semantics for a tag x be derived from the tag's location  lx  and time  tx  usage distributions 
example place tags are delhi  logan airport and notre
dame. similarly  example event tags are thanksgiving  world
cup  aids walk 1  and new york marathon  interestingly  new york marathon represents both an event and a place . examples of tags not expected to represent events or locations are dog  party  food and blue.
　the first step in determining whether a tag refers to an  event  or  place  is to define these terms. we aimed for definitions that address both general human perception and the generic  i.e. socially common  semantics of  event  and  place  . we propose that:
event tags are expected to exhibit significant temporal patterns.
place tags are expected to exhibit significant spatial patterns.
　the term  significant  in these definitions is intentionally vague - designed to capture the idea that  event  and  place  are socially defined  as illustrated by the examples above . more concretely  the definition refers to the fact that a person can expect new york marathon to appear significantly more often every year around november and in new york city; whereas dog should appear at almost any time and in almost any location. we expect a reasonable human judge to be able to determine  for any tag and the set of photos associated with that tag  whether or not the tag represents an event and/or a place.
　it is important to consider both event and place tags relative to some pre-defined geographic region. for example  carnival may not exhibit any patterns world wide  but does have temporal patterns if we are only considering major cities in brazil. similarly  palace may have distinct location-based patterns in certain regions  say  london  but no significant patterns world wide. for simplicity  we do not introduce notation to handle the specification of geographic regions - we generally assume that the set of photos considered by the algorithm is such that for all photos p in the set  `p is contained in the given region.
　related to regions is the concept of  scale . the basic idea is that tags may exhibit significant temporal or spatial patterns at various scales. for example  museum refers to specific locations within the san francisco bay area  while california is not expected to show significant patterns if our region is limited to san francisco. similarly  conferences lasting multiple days  e.g. sigir 1  and even holidays with significant activity prior to a specific date  e.g. christmas   do not appear to be events at the hour or single day scale  but do exhibit distinctive time patterns relative to longer time scales. accordingly  the methods described below search for significant patterns at multiple spatial and temporal scales.
1. event/place identification
　the goal of our analysis is to determine  for each tag in the dataset  whether the tag represents an event  and whether the tag represents a place. the intuition behind the various methods we present is that an event  or place  refers to a specific segment of time  or region in space . so  the  significant patterns  for event and place tags should be manifested as bursts over small parts of time or space. more specifically  the number of usage occurrences for an event tag should be much higher in a small segment of time than the number of usage occurrences of that tag outside the segment. the scale of the segment is one factor that these methods must address; the other factor is calculating whether the number of usage occurrences within the segment is significantly different from the number outside the segment.
　to simplify the discussion  we describe the methods as they pertain to event identification. the notions of segments and scales are not domain specific - i.e. both time and space can be divided into segments  perhaps overlapping  of various scale. any place/space specific issues are addressed  but otherwise the translation to place-based analysis is left to the reader.
　in the remainder of this section  we describe the methods in detail. we first present adaptations of two well-known techniques to the problem at hand. then we present a new method for event and place identification: scale-structure identification.
1 borrowed methods
　at a high level  the steps for the modified  burst-detection methods are the following:
1. scale specification - choose an ordered set of scale values  r = {rk | k = 1...k rk1   rk1    k1   k1}. we generally choose an exponentially increasing set of scales  e.g.  rk = αk for some α   1 .
1. segment specification - for each scale rk define a finite set of time segments to search over  say yrk. we use a regularly spaced grid where the grid size is based on the scale; but overlapping or arbitrary segments are possible.
1. partial computation - for each scale rk and each time segment in yrk  compute a statistic on tx that captures some aspect of the tag's usage pattern in time  likely  although not necessarily  based on some relationship between the usage occurrences within a time segment versus outside of the segment .
1. significance test - aggregate the partial computation statistics for each time segment at each scale to determine whether tag x is an event.
1. identify significant segments - provided a significant pattern for x is found  determine which scales and time segments correspond to the event.
　before describing each method  we introduce some necessary notation. first  we use tr x i  to denote how many times tag x was used in time segment i  the subscript indicates that the segment is defined in relation to scale r . the maximum value for tr x i  is the number of photos in the segment - we use nr i  to denote the number of photos taken during time segment i. some of the methods below also require the total number of tag usage occurrences in a segment - we denote this as tr i  = px tr x i .
1.1 na： ve scan methods
　the na： ve scan methods are an application of a standard burst detection method used in signal processing . the method computes the frequency of usage for each time segment at each scale. the method identifies a  burst  when the frequency of data in a single time segment is larger than the average frequency of the data over all segments plus two times the standard deviation of segment frequencies.
　the clear majority of tags in our data have sparse usage distributions which results in low average frequencies and low standard deviations. consequently  the standard formulation of this method suffers from too many false positives. to combat this problem we compute the average and standard deviation values from aggregate data - either from all of the photos or from all of the tags combined. we further relax the condition that the number of tag occurrences be larger than the mean plus two standard deviations - instead requiring that the ratio of these values be larger than some threshold  which we can vary for optimal performance.
　for na： ve scan i  the partial computation  step 1  for each tag x is specified by:   where μn is the mean of {nr i |i = 1...} and σn is the standard deviation of {nr i |i = 1...}. we use a variable threshold of this statistic in identifying events  step 1 .
　to identify the segments of time corresponding to an event for a tag  step 1 above   we simply record the segments that pass the significance test  step 1 above . specifically  we record the values of i and r where the partial computation statistic is larger than the threshold.
　we omit the details of steps 1 and 1  how to search over i and r  since any brute force search method applies. we also remind the reader that the formulation for location-based burst detection is analogous.
　an alternative approach  which we refer to as na： ve scan ii  compares the individual tag occurrences to the total number of tag occurrences  instead of the number of photo occurrences. the reasoning behind this modification is based on the assumption that if tag x captures the important aspects of a photo  then that photo will require few tags in addition to x.
　the partial computation statistic is   where μt is the mean of {tr i |i = 1...} and σt is the standard deviation of {tr i |i = 1...}. if every photo had the same number of tags  these results would be identical to those produced by na： ve scan i. however  as photos can have an arbitrary number of tags  with some photos using far more tags than others  the na： ve scan ii method does produce
 slightly  different results.
1.1 spatial scan methods
　the spatial scan methods are a standard application of the spatial scan statistic   a burst detection method used in epidemiology. these methods assume an underlying probability model of observing some phenomenon over some domain. the methods then test whether the number of occurrences of a phenomenon in a segment of the domain  e.g. segment of time  is abnormal relative to the underlying probability model. this abnormality test is performed for each segment.
　to illustrate how the spatial scan methods work  we describe an example from our data. consider eatbrains  which refers to a slightly obscure event that took place in san francisco  where people dressed up as zombies and walked around certain neighborhoods . suppose:  1  over the 1+ years covered by our data  q denotes the global probability of this tag being applied to any photo;  1  all m photos tagged with eatbrains occur within a single two hour segment  and  1  there are a total of n photos taken during this same two hours. if eatbrains refers to an event of any significance  m should be quite a bit larger than qn. the spatial scan methods are designed to test whether the value m represents a significant deviation from the global probability distribution  an important note is that q is not defined a-priori  it is derived from the data. 
　the expression for the partial computation statistic for spatial scan i is:

where i ，  is the indicator function. for details on the derivation of this expression see kulldorff .
　as in the na： ve scan methods  the significance test  step 1  uses a single  variable threshold value - tags whose partial computation statistic exceeds this value are identified as events. also  by storing the values of i and r where the partial computation statistic is larger than the threshold we can identify the segments in time when events occur  step 1 . finally  details of steps 1 and 1  how to search over i and r  are likewise omitted since brute force search methods are sufficient.
　similar to the na： ve scan ii modification  we developed spatial scan ii using the total number of tags that occur inside segments. we omit the partial computation expression for spatial scan ii - it can be produced by simply replacing occurrences of nr i   the number of photos in each segment  with tr i   the number of tags in each segment  in the partial computation expression of spatial scan i  above .
　in the four methods described above  we determine the segments of time for each scale independent from the actual usage distributions of the tags. additionally  these methods can only propose a-priori time segments as the times of events. in the worst case  these segments might hide the actual time of an event by splitting the usage occurrences into adjacent segments  none of which are above the significance test threshold. the next method we describe addresses the issue of a-priori defined time segments.
1 scale-structure identification
　the scale-structure identification method performs a significance test  step 1 above  that depends on multiple scales simultaneously and does not rely on a-priori defined time segments. accordingly  the scale-structure identification method performs all the steps listed above except the segment specification step  step 1 .
　the key intuition behind scale-structure identification is the following: if tag x is an event then the points in tx  the time usage distribution  should appear as a single cluster at many scales. the clustering mechanism used in scalestructure identification is similar to the clustering mechanism in the scale-space method developed by witkin . however  whereas witkin was interested in any structure that exhibited robustness over a range of scales  we are interested in the robustness of a single type of structure - a single cluster.
　consider the graph over tx where edges between points exist if and only if the points are closer together than r  recall that r is the scale variable . let yr be the set of connected subcomponents of this graph. the partial computation step  step 1 above  computes the entropy of yr for each scale r. specifically  the partial computation statistic
1
is defined as: er = py （yr |y |/|tx| log1 |tx|/|y | . we use the entropy value as a measurement of how similar the data is to a single cluster since entropy increases as data becomes more distributed. we are interested in low entropy structures  yr  note that er = 1 when the usage distribution is a single cluster  i.e. |yr| = 1 .
　for place identification we simply replace tx with lx in the calculation of er  we compute the distance between points in lx as the l1 distance between the points as they lie on a sphere .
　a caveat to the partial computation statistic concerns periodic events. periodic events have strong clusters  at multiple scales  that are evenly spaced apart in time. practically  because tags occur in bursts  we also require that a periodic tag exhibit at least three strong clusters  to rule out tags that just happened to occur in two strong temporal clusters but are not truly periodic . of course  this assumption could result in some false negatives  e.g. recurring events that only appear twice in our dataset   but it is necessary due to the sparse nature of our data  to mitigate these false negatives we could check whether the two strong clusters were spaced apart at some culturally meaningful distance like one month  one year  etc. .
　we check for periodic events by:  1  identifying  strong  clusters  i.e. clusters that contain at least 1% of the data    1  measuring how far apart the strong clusters are   1  making sure the cluster variances are not too big relative to the distances between clusters  i.e. the standard deviations of the usage distributions for each cluster should be  on average  smaller than 1% of the average inter-cluster distance   and  1  making sure the distances between clusters are  even   i.e. the standard deviation of inter-cluster distances is smaller than 1% of the average inter-cluster distance . if a tag's temporal distribution passes all of these tests1  we re-compute the scale structure for this tag by treating time as modulo μ  the average inter-cluster distance. specifically  we re-compute yr from tx1 =1 {t modulo μ | t （
1
tx} using the distance metric kt1  t1k = min |t1  t1| |μ+ t1   t1| |μ + t1   t1| . intuitively  this modulo adjustment to the time dimension aligns the  strong  clusters so that they will be treated as a single cluster. for example  if a tag's temporal distribution has 1 strong clusters that are on average 1 days apart  the modulo adjustment to time corresponds to the cyclical calendar year.
　finally  the significance test calculation  step 1  aggregates the partial computation statistics simply by summing them over the set of scales:. this summed value is tested against a threshold to determine if the tag is an event. by recording the scale structures at each scale  we can determine which time segments strongly characterize an event tag  step 1 . in fact  we can then characterize the tag  or rather the event it refers to  at multiple scales.
1. evaluation
　we implemented the methods described above  and performed a direct evaluation of the methods' performances over part of the flickr dataset. the goals of the evaluation were to establish whether any of the methods can reliably identify events/places in the tag data; compare the performance of the different methods; and evaluate the performance with varying parameters. finally  we seek to understand the type of errors made by the different methods.
　we begin by describing the flickr data used in our evaluation. we then provide details on how we generated the ground truth for the tags in the dataset  and the results of the evaluation.
1 the flickr dataset
　the data we use in this study consists of geotagged photos from flickr and the associated tags. location and time metadata is available for roughly fourteen million public flickr photos  at the time this paper was written . the capture time is usually available from data embedded in the photo file by most digital cameras. while the photo location could also be provided by the camera  it is more likely to be entered by the user using maps on the flickr web site  or possibly obtained from an external gps device via synchronization software. in this paper we focus our evaluation on photos from the san francisco bay area. we plot the location for every geotagged photo in our dataset in figure 1. in figure 1  we plot the location and time usage distributions for the tag hardly strictly bluegrass.
　the san francisco bay area is currently one of the bestrepresented geographic regions in flickr  increasing the likelihood of finding significant patterns at sub-city and subregion scales. furthermore  san francisco is the only such region for which we could reliably generate the ground truth  see below . we note  however  that restricting the dataset to a specific geographic region did not require any alterations to the methods or the evaluation computations.
　in addition to the regional specification  we applied filters to improve the time/location metadata correctness and to ensure sufficient data for the analysis. the two filters to

figure 1: spatial distribution of all san francisco geotagged photos in our dataset  white markers .

figure 1: location  top  and time  bottom  usage distributions for the tag hardly strictly bluegrass in the san francisco bay area. the zoomed in map view shows the details of the larger location cluster from the zoomed out view.
improve correctness were:  1  if the photo's capture time was  a  prior than 1 or  b  not later than the upload time  the photo was removed; and  1  if the photo's location resolution was too inaccurate  i.e. anything other than the two most accurate levels in the scale from 1   the photo was removed. the filter to ensure sufficient data applied to tags. any tag that was used less than 1 times or by only one user was removed.
　our final dataset consists of 1 photos with an average of 1 tags per photo  s.d. 1 . these photos cover a total temporal range of 1 days  starting from january 1  1. the average number of photos per day was 1  s.d. 1   with a minimum of zero and a maximum of 1.
　from these photos we extracted 1 unique tags. as expected  and similar to previous work  1  1   tag usage was zipf-distributed. the maximum number of photos associated with a single tag was 1  for san francisco   and the mean was 1  s.d. 1 .
　the flickr dataset is rather new  and presents a number of additional challenges. while flickr popularity is rising  the number of geo-referenced photos is still relatively low. we see sparse activity within every group of photos - for example  flickr does not contain photos tagged golden gate bridge for every day since january 1  1. another complicating factor is the fact that the data is often uneven: more photos are likely to be uploaded with the tag golden gate bridge than bay bridge  for example. in the time dimension  because of the growing active community on flickr  an order of magnitude more photos were taken and uploaded during 1 than during 1  complicating time-based analyses.
1 ground truth
　to generate the ground truth for our evaluation we manually annotated each of the 1 tags. specifically  we looked at a sample of pictures associated with each tag in our dataset  including their locations and times of capture  to determine whether the tag corresponds to an event  and whether the tag corresponds to a place. this in-depth analysis was needed to eliminate errors that arise from obscure tags  e.g.  eatbrains that described a relatively unknown san francisco event   and by issues of polysemy and homonymy  e.g.  apple in san francisco was mostly assigned to photos of the apple computer store . examining the content of the photographs was often required - from the photo and caption content we were often able to generalize  correct  and interpolate inaccurate or sparse data.
　to measure the discrepancy between common sense interpretations of the tags in our dataset and the ground truth  we also collected a set of labels for the tags generated by having four people vote  without access to the photos or their metadata  on whether the tag referred to an event  a place or both. this vote-based data exhibited systematic errors relative to the ground truth data:  1  obscure or un-popular events and places were often false negatives  i.e. incorrectly labeled as not being events or places    1  generic tags like anniversary and park were often false positives  while they have clear event and place semantics within a limited scope  over the whole data set they did not refer to specific time segments or regions of space   and  1  event tags like future of web apps were often not labeled as places even though many events also occur in specific regions of space. for these reasons  we omit comparison of the place and event identification methods to the vote-based data.
1 results
　since all of the methods produce ranked results  we can use standard ir metrics to evaluate performance. for each tag  the methods produces a number that indicates how likely this tag is to be an event  or place . rather than choosing a single threshold for each method to categorize the tags  we can vary the threshold dynamically and examine the tradeoff in terms of recall and precision for each method.
　plots of the recall vs. precision curves are shown in figure 1 for places  top  and events  bottom . the x-axis represents a recall value - the percentage of actual events  or places  that are identified as events  or places . the thresholds for each method were adjusted to produce this recall value. the y-axis shows the precision - the percentage of tags identified as events  or places  that are actually events  or places . for example  when the threshold for scale-structure identification for events is set so that recall is 1%  the precision is 1%. we can see in both figures
p-r areamax f1min cena： ve scan i111na： ve scan ii
spatial scan i
spatial scan ii scale-structure1 1 1
11 1 1
11 1 1
1na： ve scan i111na： ve scan ii
spatial scan i
spatial scan ii scale-structure1 1 1
11 1 1
11 1 1
1table 1: precision-recall area  maximum f1  and minimum ce values for the various methods.

figure 1: precision vs. recall for the place  top  and event  bottom  identification tasks.
that scale-structure identification performs better than the traditional methods  for almost all recall values and for both event and place identification.
　from these curves we computed  1  the area under the precision-recall curve  p-r area    1  the maximum value of the f1 statistic for each method  max f1   a metric that balances precision and recall values  and  1  the minimum total classification error  min ce   cf.  . the results are shown in table 1  again indicating that scale-structure identification performs better than the other methods.
　as an alternative to searching for optimal threshold values for the methods  one can simply take the top n results from the ordered lists produced by the methods  where n is variable . table 1 shows precision and recall values for n = 1  and 1. table 1 lists the top 1 tags for each method for both place and event detection. again  scale-structure identification performs better than the other methods.
　we also studied the sensitivity of the scale-structure identification method to the scale specification step  step 1 in section 1 . we varied the exponential base in the scale sampling scheme from 1 to 1  the exponents were positive integers  marking the sequential position of the scale value . the results were robust to these changes. one point to note  however  is that performance slightly  but consistently  improved as the exponential base decreased. in other words  the scale-structure identification method performed
top 1top 1top 1na： ve scan i1  11  11  1na： ve scan ii
spatial scan i
spatial scan ii scale-structure1  1 1  1 1  1
1  11  1 1  1 1  1
1  11  1 1  1 1  1
1  1na： ve scan i1  11  11  1na： ve scan ii
spatial scan i
spatial scan ii scale-structure1  1 1  1 1  1
1  11  1 1  1 1  1
1  11  1 1  1 1  1
1  1table 1: values for  precision  recall  for different numbers of returned tags.
better with denser samplings of the space of scale values  but only slightly. accordingly  we recommend  for computational gains  to sample the scale space fairly sparsely as the results are not strongly affected.
　due to space constraints  we do not include detailed results from our analysis of the segment identification step  step 1 in section 1 . briefly  the parts of time and space that were associated with identified events and places were mostly accurate. the only systematic errors found were due to sparse  wrong  or missing data. for example  tags like october and summer had temporal distributions that were not representative of the true duration of these events. while more data will help for some of these tags  e.g. conference names   some events like seasons and months are not likely have uniform distributions over their true durations.
　in terms of error analysis  we identified several classes of common errors with the scale-structure identification method. first  the majority of false positives and false negatives for place identification were the result of sparse data. likewise the false positives for event identification were often due to sparse data. false negative event tags were also caused by bad data  e.g. incorrect capture time . additional sampling and filtering techniques could potentially alleviate some of these problems.
　overall  the performance of the scale-structure identification method holds promise for automatic extraction of place and event semantics. the scale-structure identification method clearly outperforms the methods borrowed from other domains. while the difference is significant  we believe that one reason for the gain is the  single-cluster-like  filtering; the borrowed methods simply look for outlier/bursty segments without measuring or enforcing the uniqueness of the segments.
1. conclusions and future work
　we have taken a first step in showing that semantics can be assigned to free-form tags using the usage distribution of each tag. the ability to extract semantics can improve current tagging systems  for instance  by allowing more powerful search and disambiguation mechanisms. additionally  the knowledge that these methods extract can help with tasks that outside the scope of the specific system.
na： ve scan ialcatraz  friends  event  pfa  bb  1  china town  lombard street  trip  augustna： ve scan ii
spatial scan i
spatial scan ii scale-structurealcatraz  friends  event  pfa  bb  1  china town  lombard street  trip  august
gg park  alcatraz  baseball  giants  hsb  de young  event  sf giants  pfa  gg bridge alcatraz  gg park  baseball  hsb  giants  pfa  de young  sf giants  event  gg bridge pet cemetary  revision1  ruby red  dahlias  mashpitsf1  vshd  red devil lounge  club neon  fwa  bhna： ve scan ibb  eatbrains  eatbrains1  zombies  wedding  zombie  zombiemob1  byobw  bbw  lombardna： ve scan ii
spatial scan i
spatial scan ii scale-structurebb  eatbrains  eatbrains1  zombies  wedding  zombie  zombiemob1  byobw  bbw  lombard
bb  wedding  hsb  event  byobw  pride  the fwa  bbw  bigwheel  pfa bb  wedding  hsb  event  byobw  the fwa  pride  1  pfa  anniversary zombiemob  bb 1  valleyschwag  zombie  zombiemob1  eatbrains  vshd  eatbrains1  zombies  air racetable 1: top 1 scored tags for place  top  and event  bottom  identification for each method. higher scoring tags appear further to the left. at the optimal f1 threshold  all of the tags were labeled as places  or events . italicized tags are false positive errors. note  we use the following abbreviations: palace of fine arts ★ pfa  bay to breakers ★ bb  golden gate ★ gg  hardly strictly bluegrass ★ hsb  vs hoe down ★ vshd  future of web apps ★ fwa  bottom of the hill ★ bh  and bring your own big wheel ★ bbw.　in particular  we have shown that location and time metadata associated with photos and their tags enables the extraction of  place  and  event  semantics. this mapping of tags to events and locations could improve image search  serve as a basis for collection visualization  and assist in other photo-related tasks. this type of knowledge can also help create an ad-hoc gazetteer for events and locations that could be used for various tasks beyond photo management. we plan to revisit the image search  visualization and gazetteer deployment in future work.
　we would also like to extend the system to handle multiregional problems. as mentioned above  the tag carnival may be event-like only in major cities of brazil; we note above that the data analysis should be limited to specific geographic regions. ideally  we could simultaneously generate  store  and disambiguate tag semantics for different regions throughout the world.
　finally  we plan to deploy our methods to other temporally and spatially encoded data  as they become exceedingly available on the web. we also look at extending the metadata features used  beyond location and time  to verify that our methods are still effective in extracting other semantics beyond place and event.
1. acknowledgments
　we would like to thank shane ahern  simon king  rahul nair and malcolm slaney for their valueable insights  comments and assistance.
