it is commonly agreed that accounts receivable  ar  can be a source of financial difficulty for firms when they are not efficiently managed and are underperforming. experience across multiple industries shows that effective management of ar and overall financial performance of firms are positively correlated. in this paper we address the problem of reducing outstanding receivables through improvements in the collections strategy. specifically  we demonstrate how supervised learning can be used to build models for predicting the payment outcomes of newlycreated invoices  thus enabling customized collection actions tailored for each invoice or customer. our models can predict with high accuracy if an invoice will be paid on time or not and can provide estimates of the magnitude of the delay. we illustrate our techniques in the context of real-world transaction data from multiple firms. finally  simulation results show that our approach can reduce collection time up to a factor of four compared to a baseline that is not model-driven.   
categories and subject descriptors 
g.1  probability and statistics : correlation and regression analysis  experimental design. 
i.1     simulation and modeling : applications. 
j.1     administrative data processing : business  financial. 
general terms 
design  economics  experimentation  performance. 
keywords 
accounts receivable  payment collection  order to cash   invoice to cash  predictive modeling  knowledge discovery.1 
 
 
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  or republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
kdd'1  august 1  1  las vegas  nevada  usa. copyright 1 acm  1-1-1/1...$1. 
1. introduction 
the order-to-cash  o1c  process describes a composite business process that comprises the necessary steps to fulfill an order for a good or service  from order entry to payment receipt. while the number and nature of such steps may vary depending on the type and size of the firm  most o1c processes follow a similar highlevel workflow as illustrated in figure 1. 

 
figure 1. typical order-to-cash process 
 
in this paper we concentrate on the invoice-to-cash process  i.e. two highlighted steps of figure 1. it constitutes the core of the collections activities and deal with account prioritization  customer contact activities  collection calls  escalation  and resolution of disputes. most often  these steps are processed manually and hence  slow  expensive  and inaccurate  despite their importance to the business.  moreover  the collection actions are typically generic and do not take into account customer specifics  e.g.  all customers are contacted at fixed intervals  even though some have always paid on time; while it is generally true that the later a customer is contacted the less likely the invoices will get paid on time  repeated contacting of  good  customers may lead to lower customer satisfaction.  such inefficiencies in current practices lead to significant delays in ar collections or even to failure to collect before write-off deadlines. 
the effectiveness of ar collections can be significantly improved through better management of the collection steps. for instance  taking preemptive actions on invoices that are likely to become delinquent can drive down the collection time.  furthermore  by prioritizing delinquent invoices for actions based on the expected time of payment  one can optimize the use of collections resources. in this paper we focus on the task of predicting the payment outcomes of newly-created invoices  thus enabling more effective collections management. 
1. invoice outcome prediction 
there are many metrics used to measure the collection effectiveness of a firm  . for instance  average days delinquent measures the average time from invoice due date to the paid date  i.e.  the average days invoices are overdue. a related metric  days sales outstanding  dso  expresses the average time in days that receivables are outstanding  computed as: 
 
most commonly used metrics are functions of the time taken to collect on invoices. if one can predict the outcome of an invoice  one can use this information to drive the collection process so as to improve on a desired collection metric.  for instance  if one can identify invoices that are likely to be delinquent at the time of creation  one can attempt to reduce the time to collection by proactively trying to collect on these invoices. typically  collections departments wait until invoices are delinquent to start taking collection actions  such as sending out reminders or making phone calls. however  one could significantly benefit from preemptively contacting potentially delinquent accounts. furthermore  even after an invoice is past due  it is beneficial to know which invoices are likely to be paid sooner than later  if no action is taken. given that resources for collections activities are often limited  one may choose to prioritize invoices based on estimating how late a payment will be; e.g.  it makes more business sense to contact a customer who is likely to pay 1 days late  than one who would pay within 1 days without contact. 
we formulate the invoice outcome prediction task as a supervised learning problem: given instances of past invoices and their outcomes  build a model that can predict when a newly-created invoice will be paid  if no action is taken. in particular  each instance is classified into one of five classes: on time  1 days late  1 days late  1 days late  and more than 1 days late  or 1+ days late . these five classes are commonly used in the payment collection business  where each class  corresponds to a customized collection strategy.  data instances correspond to features representing invoices  which are described in detail below. 
this formulation corresponds to using the average days delinquent as the collections performance metric. however  if the objective is to maximize a different performance metric  that can be done by using an alternative target  class  variable that is correlated with this metric. for example  one may use the collection effectiveness index  cei   which compares what was collected in a given period to what was available to collect  defined as: 
 
in this case  invoices can be labeled based on the actual amounts collected in a specified time period. 
1 data preprocessing 
the analysis in this paper is done on invoice records for four firms  including two fortune 1 companies.  three of these firms are competitive in the markets for supplying high-tech equipments for telecommunication  networking  and it services.  the fourth firm specializes in online advertising placement and scheduling services. the summary of invoice records is presented in table 1. these data sets cover invoices created from march 1 to february 1. when learning from these data sets  we differentiate invoices of first time customers from those of returning customers  because their payment behaviors are very different  moreover  there is additional historical information available for invoices of returning customers.  in this paper  we use the term first-time invoices to refer to the invoices from firsttime customers. likewise  returning invoices are invoices from returning customers.  table 1 shows that the majority of invoices of three firms  a  b and d  are returning invoices while c has the majority of its invoices billed to first time customers. 
 
table 1. summary of data sets 
firm # of invoices # of returning invoices  %  # of first-time invoices a 1 1  1  1 b 1 1  1  1 c 1 1  1  1 d 1 1  1  1  
 
our input data consists of a set of invoices at the end of the collections cycle. each invoice is described by 1 features that capture information such as order details  terms and conditions  sales representative information  etc. we begin by eliminating features that are specific to an invoice  such as invoice ids. we then remove leakage variables - features that provide information about the class label that one would not have at the time of creation of an invoice  such as invoice closing date and number of contacts.  finally  we filter out features that have too many missing values or have unique values  such as invoice types.  this leaves us with only three meaningful features  named as invoicelevel features that represent an invoice  see table 1 : invoice base amount  payment terms  and invoice category.  given the number of days delinquent  computed based on invoice close date and due date  each invoice/instance is labeled with one of the five class labels: on time  1 days late  1 days late  1 days late  and more than 1 days late  or 1+ days late . 
the three invoice-level features are insufficient for effective modeling. however  a large number of invoices are for returning customers  which is especially true for firms with large accounts such as a and b  where more than 1% of the invoices are for returning customers. based on this observation  we develop additional features that  a  capture the transaction history of a customer  e.g.  the percentage of invoices paid late in the past; and  b  reflect the current status of the customer's accounts  e.g. the sum of base amounts of all invoices currently outstanding. table 1 lists all these historical and aggregate features that are generated  features numbered 1 . these features provide a significant amount of information that can be leveraged for predicting the outcome on a new invoice. however  such information is not available for first-time customers  or for the first invoices of customers. therefore  in this paper we focus primarily on building predictive models for the invoices of returning customers. however  for completeness  in section 1 we also discuss the task of modeling on invoices without history. 
table 1. summary of features 
no. feature description 1. invoice base amount base amount of a invoice 1. payment term the deadline of payment due 1. category indicator of whether invoice is under dispute or not 1. number of total paid invoices number of paid invoices prior to the creation date of a new invoice of a customer. 1. number of invoices that were paid ate number of invoices which were paid late prior to the creation date of a new invoice of a customer 1. ratio of paid invoices that were late ratio of 1. over 1. 1. sum of the base amount of total paid invoices the sum of the base amount from all the paid invoices prior to a new invoice for a customer 1. sum of the base amount of invoices that were paid late the sum of the base amount from all the paid invoices which were late prior to a new invoice for a customer. 1. ratio of sum of paid base amount that 
were late ratio of 1. over 1. 1. average days late of paid invoices being late. average days late of all paid invoices that were late prior to a new invoice for a customer 1. number of total outstanding invoices number of the outstanding invoices prior to the creation date of a new invoice of a customer. 1. number of outstanding invoices that were already late number of the outstanding invoices which were late prior to the creation date of a new invoice of a customer 1. ratio of outstanding invoices that were late ratio of 1. over 1. 1. sum of the base amount of total outstanding invoices the sum of the base amount from all the outstanding invoices prior to a new invoice for a customer 1. sum of the base amount of outstanding invoices that were late the sum of the base amount from all the outstanding invoices which were late prior to a new invoice for a customer. 1. ratio of sum of outstanding base amount that were late ratio of 1. over 1. 1. average days late of outstanding invoices being late. average days late of all outstanding invoices that were late prior to a new invoice for a customer  
1. approach 
the task we formulated is a typical supervised classification problem: given a set of data instances  invoices  represented by a set of features and class labels  build a model that can classify a new instance into one of five target classes - on time  1 days late  1 days late  1 days late  and more than 1  or 1+  days late.  in the following sections we will discuss the different settings for invoice prediction we studied. 
first  we compared the following commonly used classification algorithms for our domain - c1 decision tree induction    na ve bayes   1   logistic regression  1  and boosting decision stumps  . in addition  we also experimented with the part algorithm   1   which is a rule learner that uses a separate-andconquer approach. it builds a rule  removes the instances that it covers  and repeats this process recursively on the remaining instances until there are none left. to produce each rule  part builds a partial pruned decision tree in a manner similar to c1  and the leaf with the largest coverage is made into the rule while the rest of the tree is discarded.  
experiments  here and in other sections  were run using 1-fold cross validation  and classification accuracy is reported as the performance metric. where relevant  we report the accuracy in predicting a specific class  e.g.  1+ days late. as a point of reference  we also report the accuracy of the majority-class predictor  i.e.  a classifier that always predicts the class most represented in the training data. we refer to this as the baseline. 
table 1 summarizes our results on the comparison of different learning algorithms. both part and c1 significantly outperform the competing methods. in addition to learning accurate classifiers  part and c1 are good choices for our domain  because they perform well at handling missing values  nominal values  and produce comprehensible models in the form of human-readable decision lists. since c1 produces marginally better models than part for 1 of the 1 firms  we use it as the base algorithm for the remainder of this paper. 
 
table 1. summary of classification algorithms 
firm accuracy base line part c1 boosting logistic na ve bayes a 1 1 1 1 1 1 b 1 1 1 1 1 1 c 1 1 1 1 1 1 d 1 1 1 1 1 1  
1 using historical data 
in section 1 we describe the construction of historical and aggregate features. we conjecture that these features provide a significant amount of information beyond the simple invoice-level features. we validate this hypothesis by comparing models built using only invoice-level features to models built using both invoice and historical features. experiments were conducted using only data for invoices of returning customers  because historical features are only meaningful for these invoices.   
the prediction results are summarized in table 1. we observe that even with just the three invoice-level features we can predict the payment outcome of an invoice more accurately than predicting the majority class. however  this improvement is marginal in some cases  as in b and d  where the difference in accuracy is less than 1 percent. furthermore  incorporating historical features into the data gives rise to a substantial increase in prediction accuracies for all four firms. we observe improvements ranging from 1  b  to 1 percent  a . overall  the model accuracies are significantly better than the baseline - prior probability of majority class. as such  using these predictions to drive workflow of collections is likely to perform a lot better than current practices that treat all invoices equally. we demonstrate this through simulation experiments in section 1. 
table 1. using historic data to predict returning invoice payment behavior 
firm feature category accuracy baseline accuracy a invoice 1 1 invoice+history 1 b invoice 1 1 invoice+history 1 c invoice 1 1 invoice+history 1 d invoice 1 1 invoice+history 1  
1 cost-sensitive learning 
in accounts receivable collection  the main reason for categorizing the payment behavior of invoices is to be able to customize monitoring and collection activities according to their past due behavior. one of the critical measurements of collection performance is average days delinquent. as such  we have focused our modeling on predicting the expected time in payment. however  as discussed in section 1  there are other key performance indicators  kpis  that are often used to measure collection success. for instance  several of our firms have a kpi objective to keep the number of invoices that are more than 1 days overdue below a specified limit. these invoices are potentially bad debt accounts  which require special decisions and a set of actions to collect payments for these accounts.  if this set of invoices can be identified at an early stage of the lifecycle of the invoices  one can preemptively deal with potentially bad debt accounts before they turn into debt or even get written off.   
to attain this objective we build models that are focused on being able to predict accurately for the 1+ class. by default  classification algorithms assume that all classes are equally important. however  the penalty for predicting an invoice will be paid on time when in fact it will more than 1 days overdue  is usually higher than the reverse. this task is further compounded by the fact that these high-risk invoices are under-represented in the data. this can be seen in the distribution of invoices for firm a in figure 1  where the total number of 1+ invoices is only 1% of the entire data set.  the data for the three other firms show a similar imbalance in the data.  
 

figure 1. invoice distribution of firm a 
to address the different misclassifications costs  we use instance re-weighting  which is a common approach in cost-sensitive learning. as input  we provide a misclassification cost matrix  such as the one shown in the second column of table 1. each row and each column corresponds to target classes. each cell corresponds to the cost of misclassifying the row class as the column class. the diagonal corresponds to correct classifications and hence are all zero. by default  all costs  other than the diagonal  are set to one.  instances belonging to particular class are re-weighted proportionally to the sum of its misclassification costs. 
table 1 reports our results on the four firms for one such cost matrix. we present both the overall accuracy  as well the true positive  tp  rate of just the 1+ class. the results show that instance re-weighting is a very effective way of dealing with the high class imbalance in this data - we can improve more than 1% of the tp rate of the 1+ class without much loss to overall accuracy as is seen for firm a. 
 
table 1. cost sensitive prediction accuracy for four firms.  
the standard cost matrix corresponds to equal misclassification costs. 
firm cost matrix accuracy 1+ tp rate a standard 1 1   a b c d e 
1 1 1| a = on time 
1 1 1| b = 1 days 
 1 1 1| c = 1 days 
 1 1 1| d = 1 days 
 1 1 1| e = 1+ days 1 1 b standard 1 1 same as a 1 1 c standard 1 1 same as a 1 1 d standard 1 1 same as a 1 1  
to further explore this  we ran additional experiments using different costs matrices. the results for firm a  for three different cost matrices are summarized in table 1. 
 
table 1. cost sensitive prediction accuracy for firm a 
cost matrix accuracy 1+ accuracy   a b c d e 
1 1 1| a = on time 
1 1 1| b = 1 days 
 1 1 1| c = 1 days 
 1 1 1| d = 1 days 
 1 1 1| e = 1+ days 1 1 1 1 1 
1 1 1 
 1 1 1 
 1 1 1 
 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
1 1 1 
 1 1 1 
 1 1 1 
 1 1 1 1 1  
the results show that by increasing the cost of misclassifying the 1+ class  we can get the learning algorithm to focus on building classifiers that are more accurate at predicting this class. in fact  with high enough misclassification costs the classifier can learn to predict the 1+ class with more than 1% accuracy. as expected  this comes at a trade-off on overall classification accuracy. this trade-off can be balanced based on the desired performance objectives. 
the cost matrix can be specified based on the actual costs associated with the incorrect prediction in practice.  for instance  if a 1+ invoice is incorrectly labeled as on time invoice  then the associated cost includes the interest loss because of potential customer debt. the loss due to misclassification need not always be quantified by monetary value.  for instance  if an on-time instance is misclassified as a 1+ instance  it is likely that the customer will be contacted even before the due date. apart  from the wasted cost of contacting a customer who is going to pay on time  there is the additional risk of damaging the customer relationship. the trade-offs between expected loss in revenue and customer satisfaction are quite complex and vary from firm to firm. in our current modeling  we only concern ourselves with the misclassification of 1+ instances into other class labels. however  the same methodology can be used to accommodate other cost-structures that may represent alternative kpi objectives. 
1 prediction for new accounts 
as discussed in section 1 we have focused primarily on invoices of returning customers  because of the richness of historical data that is not present in the invoice-level features. however  in some cases it may be possible to get additional information on the customers themselves  which may make it possible to even build models for invoices of first-time customers. 
invoice payment risk  to a large extent  may depend on the customer's financial capability and willingness to pay.  such factors may be influenced by customer credit worthiness  organizational profile  business market profile  etc.  these factors are captured in a set of customer features  such as credit limit  segment  and region. for firm a  such customer-level attributes are actually collected and are readily available for modeling. we selected 1 such attributes after going through the same feature selection mechanism described in section 1.   
for firm a  we now have three sets of features  namely invoicelevel  historical and customer-level features. we run experiments as before  on four combinations of these feature sets  on three versions of the firm a data - returning invoices  first-time invoice and all invoices. these results are summarized in table 1. results show that having customer features boosts prediction accuracy from 1% to 1% for first-time invoices. though this accuracy is not as high as when using historical features; it does demonstrate that the customer-level features provide some information regarding the collectibility of invoices. 
we further investigate the effectiveness of having customer features for invoices of returning customers.  as seen in table 1  adding customer features to invoice features improves prediction accuracy compared to only using invoice features  even for returning customer.  however  if we replace customer features with historical features  there is an additional 1% increase in accuracy. clearly  historical features are more effective than customer features in determining the outcome of invoices.  having all three feature sets together achieves the best prediction accuracy; however this is only a marginal improvement over using the invoice and historical features. these results motivate building separate models for prediction for returning customers; and shows that when customer information is available one can also build good models for first-time invoices.   
 
table 1. prediction accuracy of firm a 
features all invoices 
 accuracy  returning invoices 
 accuracy  first-time invoices 
 accuracy  invoice 1 1 1 invoice+custome
r 1 1 1 invoice+history 1 1 n/a invoice+custome r +history 1 1 n/a 1 unified model vs. firm-specific models 
for experiments in previous sections we built one model for each firm. however  in principle  we could build one unified model combining the data from all firms. building such a model could help generalize better and learn behaviors and patterns that are common to all firms. combining the data from all firms would also provide a lot more training data  which usually improves modeling. to test this conjecture  we build a unified model combining all training sets  and present results using this model to predict for invoices belonging to each firm. we compare this model with training individual models for each firm. 
the results in table 1 indicate that building one unified firm model indeed achieves better prediction accuracy than using separate firm models. this result suggests that these four firms share common behavior and patterns which are overlooked by  individual firm models.  this is especially true for firm c and d  whose returning invoices comprise less than 1% of all returning invoices  and each individual prediction gains significant accuracy improvement from the unified model. while there are certain differences between the fine-tuning of the individual processes  e.g.  1% of invoices of firm c are paid on time  while only 1% of invoices for firm b are on time   there seems to be one dominant workflow in place with common process policies and customer responses. hence  when data from multiple firms are available  and there are no proprietary concerns about merging this data for modeling  there is much value in building a unified model by combining datasets from all firms. 
 
 
table 1. prediction accuracy of unified model vs. firm-specific models 
test data accuracy of unified model accuracy of firm model firm a 1 1 firm b 1 1 firm c 1 1 firm d 1 1 1. invoice prioritzation 
in section 1  we demonstrated how we can effectively predict the outcome of an invoice in different settings. being able to identify invoices that are likely to be delinquent at the time of creation enables us to drive the collections process to reduce delinquency. in this section  we present simulation results that show how our invoice prediction models can help to improve collection performance.  
our simulations are based on the assumption that preemptively taking actions  such as sending a reminder  on an invoice that will be delinquent reduces the collection time. we have observed this phenomenon in other studies  where such priming does indeed reduce delinquency.  specifically  we make the simplifying assumption that taking an action on an invoice will reduce the time of delinquency  if any  by a fixed factor. invoices that will be paid on time are however unaffected by preemptive due diligence  which is a reasonable assumption for this data. an example simulated time savings calculation is shown in table 1  where the time savings factor is chosen to be 1%. 
table 1 . examples of simulated time savings on invoices 
invoice# actual delay  days  category simulated time  saving  days  1 1 1+days 1 1 -1 on time 1 1 1 1days 1  
typically there are significant costs and resource constraints that prevent taking action on all open invoices. as such  the invoiceto-cash process relies heavily on being able to prioritize invoices for action.  in the absence of additional information  one approach would be to select uniformly at random a subset of invoices for which preemptive collection actions are taken. we call this baseline approach uniform prioritization  which is a typical approach in real-world invoice-to-cash processes.  
an alternative approach would be to prioritize invoices based on the outcome predictions of our models. this prioritization is implemented in two steps. first  invoices are ordered with respect to predicted classes  i.e.  1+ days late invoices  followed by 1 days  1 days  1 days and on-time invoices  in that order. 1+ days invoices are typically for customers in bad standing and have the highest risk of collection. they are therefore placed on the top of the ordered list for due diligence. on-time invoices are most likely for good customers. such invoices could be exempt from due diligence  which not only saves cost and resources  but also avoids the potential negative impact on customer satisfaction. in a second step  within each ordered class  the individual invoices are prioritized in descending order of predicted probability of membership in the class. we call this approach model prioritization. 
now  if we have enough resources to take actions on x% of the open invoices  we could either select the top x% of invoices based on model prioritization or uniform prioritization. we compare these two approaches for different values of x  and plot the average time savings per invoice at each point in figure 1. the dataset we use is from firm a. the time savings factor we use in these simulations is 1%. this choice of 1% is somewhat arbitrary  so the absolute time savings may not correspond to what can be achieved in practice. therefore  we also report the ratio of the average time savings between the two prioritization methods - which is presented in figure 1. the results show that the advantage  per invoice  of having model prioritization increases when a smaller set of invoices is selected - which represents more likely delinquent invoices. model prioritization performs exponentially better while the selected invoice volume reduces. as we increase the amount of invoices acted upon  the two prioritization policies will naturally converge. 

figure 1. comparison of average time saved per invoice for alternative prioritization methods 
 

¡¡figure 1. relative time savings as a ratio of average days saved using model prioritization over uniform prioritization 
 
our simulations demonstrate that driving the collection process based on our invoice-outcome prediction models can significantly reduce delinquency  e.g.  when only 1% of the invoices are selected for action we save four times the number of days delinquent compared to uniform prioritization. 
1. related work 
there are a number of vendors offering pre-packaged solutions for order-to-cash. examples are oracle's e-business suite special edition order management  and sap's order-to-cash management for wholesale distribution . oracle's solution provides information visibility and reporting capabilities. sap's solution supports collections and customer relationship management. to our best knowledge  none of such solutions incorporates analytics  especially predictive modeling for improved prioritization of invoices or for customer ranking  with subsequent collection process optimization. 
predictive modeling approaches are widely used in a number of related domains  such as credit management and tax collection.  talgentra and accenture are two representative examples. to better manage customer credit  talgentra proposes to use predictive modeling approach . they consider the use of prediction techniques such as decision trees  association rules  and neural networks in order to build customer models. these models are then used to predict collection probabilities  most suitable payment terms  and schedules for a given customer.  accenture uses assignment rules to optimize workforce utilization  reassigning staff to tasks as field collection  telephone collection  customer service  for tax collection.  the rules are generated based on probable collection outcomes by learning from historic performance numbers and expected new accounts receivable .  however  the details to generate these rules are not given.  in fact  since  predictive modeling approaches vary based on the problem domains  these solutions are unlikely to be sufficient to address issues for o1c payment collection.  
there is a small body of work in the o1c domain. one such work can be found in   in which  a model is used to predict collection amounts on customer accounts based on learned relationships among known variables. the predictive models are generated with historical information on customers  on event patterns for customers  or on collectors' notes for a customer. neural networks are used as one of the approaches for predictive modeling. while the approach focuses on collection amounts prediction  we believe both amounts and delays are important for collection decision making.  another difference is that we can tackle collections not only at the customer level  but also at the invoice level. 
the most closely related work is by bailey et al. .  the authors discuss possible improvements over providian's cash collection strategy. they analyze various strategies for prioritizing collection calls and propose to use predictive modeling based on binary logistic regression and discriminative analysis to determine which clients to  outsource   i.e.  which customer accounts to hand over to an outside collections agency for further collection processing . the authors present some preliminary results of their modeling approach in the form of analytics assuming certain prediction accuracies and collection returns.  their work is complementary to ours in that they deal with the cost/benefit decisions that would need to be made once the priority/risk of each collection item is determined. our work  on the other hand  tries to assess which techniques are best suited for determining this priority/risk. 
other relevant work comes from a number of new companies that provide rule engines to prioritize invoices to maximize cash flow.  for instance  cforia   a 1 start-up  offers various collection management solutions. on their website  they claim among other ar process improvements  a new way of automatically prioritizing invoices based on a rule-based system. they claim that  cforia's rules engine automatically sends the collections and deductions teams prioritized ticklers to maximize cash flow.   another start-up  intelligentresults   offers a platform called predigy  which provides a variety of business analytics capabilities. for example  beside the manual creation of business rules  predigy also allows deriving strategies and models via automatic data clustering and segmentation. moreover  they offer integrated testing and simulation tools for verifying the effectiveness of the derived rules.  these solutions are helpful to create  use and validate the rules  once rules are known.  however  there is no evidence that these solutions enable automatic rule generation by learning from the past  which is the core of our approach in this paper. 
1. conclusions 
in this paper  we have presented a supervised learning approach and the corresponding results in the context of invoice-to-cash collections. we developed a set of aggregated features which capture historical payment behavior for each customer. our results show that having this set of features enhances the prediction accuracy significantly  and it is more valuable in predicting payment delays for invoices from returning customers than using customer features.  however  we also observed that customer features play an important role in the prediction of payment delays when no historical information is available  e.g.  for invoices from first time customers.  we demonstrate that by using cost-sensitive learning  we are able to improve prediction accuracy particularly for high risk invoices  which are underpresented in the data sets. in addition  we compared the prediction performance of a single generic model with that of firm-specific models and we showed that the former leads to better prediction accuracy. finally  we demonstrate  through simulation  that our model-driven invoice prioritization helps in reducing delinquency time under realistic time savings assumptions; and  the performance gain can reach as high as four times compared to using random prioritization. 
1. acknowledgments 
we would like to thank our colleague vijay iyengar for insightful discussions on this topic.   
