since the 1 workshop on knowledge discovery in databases  the field has seen sustained growth and interest and has attained significant maturity. the main objectives of this panel will be to reflect on the successes and failures in the field of data mining over the last eighteen years and to examine what insights we can take with us as we move forward.
categories and subject descriptors: h.1 database management: database applications - data mining
general terms: algorithms  measurement  theory
keywords: applications and implementations  failures and mistakes  future outlook  success stories
1. introduction
　over the last eighteen years  the field of knowledge discovery and data mining has matured considerably. although the field has evolved as a result of synergistic co-operation among researchers in databases  artificial intelligence  statistics and systems  it has maintained its own identity. from a single workshop in 1  the field can now lay claim to at least 1 major conferences and numerous symposium devoted to its central theme.
　at an abstract level  the theme of the field is concerned with extracting actionable and interpretable knowledge from data in as efficient a manner as possible. the primary purpose of this panel  in the context of this underlying theme  is to consider the following questions. what have been the major successes and breakthroughs that we as a field can point to with pride  what have been the critical mistakes or mis-steps that have been taken along the way  and finally  what can we hope to learn from both our successes and mistakes and how can this knowledge be used to determine how to focus our efforts in the future 
　the panelists will be asked to examine and reflect on the above questions along multiple dimensions.
  in the context of progress made in various kdd subfields such as data preprocessing  classification  clustering  frequent pattern mining  outlier detection  visualization and interpretation.
copyright is held by the author/owner s .
kdd'1  august 1  1  san jose  california  usa.
acm 1-1-1/1.
  in terms of impact on real end applications such as biomedical informatics  science and engineering informatics  and security. this issue is particularly important since the field itself is  in some senses  driven by applications.
  in relation to emerging technology trends  both software and hardware  with an eye towards the future.
related issues such as the importance of reproducibility of results and availability of suitable benchmarks  education of data mining graduate students and their readiness for an industrial setting are also fair game for discussion.
1. successes
success is the result of perfection  hard work  learning from failure  loyalty and persistence. - colin powell.
　this aspect of the panel discussion will seek to examine the significant foundational  practical  and organizational  success stories in the field over the last eighteen years. a basic question here is what have been the significant foundational successes  the goal is to reflect on algorithmic success stories  which are ably backed by theoretical and empirical evidence. for example  the entire sub-field of association rule mining came to the fore about 1 years ago and has since spawned a prolific following that has since diversified to more generic frequent pattern  e.g. trees  graphs  mining algorithms. important advances have been made in areas such as support vector machines  ensemble learning  scalable clustering  mining on data streams  time-series analysis and mining with tensors. algorithms like pagerank have simply revolutionized the way we think about web search. all of these  and this is by no means a comprehensive list  correspond to significant foundational success stories.
　a related question is where have data mining and knowledge discovery algorithms played an important role in an applied setting  similarly  what approaches have resulted in important improvements for business and financial operations  breakthrough scientific discoveries and general benefits to mankind  examples abound and include the use of data mining technologies to detect fraudulent and money laundering activities  the ability to process terabytes of image data from the sky survey database to detect and characterize fuzzy elements in the sky  the ability to detect early onset of diseases and predicting their progression to enable better disease-control measures  and the ability to predict the efficacy and potential toxicity of drugs to enable more informed drug design.
panel
　another relevant question in this context is to ask how successful have we been in the context of educating our graduate students and preparing them for data mining careers in industry  government and academia  have we been more successful in preparing them for academia versus industry and moreover is this really a trend specific to data mining  similarly  what are the elements  in particular  that contributed to the success of conferences in the field and how can we ensure that the interest is sustained 
1. mistakes and failures
our greatest glory is not in never failing  but in rising every time we fall - confucius
　over the last eighteen years  while there have clearly been successful deployment of knowledge discovery and data mining solutions  there have also undoubtedly been mistakes and failures. this aspect of the panel discussion will examine the low-lights - important mistakes and failures - with the end goal of trying to learn from them.
　a topic worth reflecting on  in this context  is whether there has been a failure to progress in line with expectations in various sub-fields of kdd  for example in a recent article  hand suggests that recent progress in classification technology is perhaps at best an illusion . as a counter-point  friedman suggests that initial progress in any new field is usually substantial  picking on the low hanging fruit  whereas subsequent progress  while very important  inevitably happens at a much slower rate.
　a related theme would be to examine the above question in the context of end application drivers. for example  in business applications  the profit margin is often the bottom line. while a more accurate data mining model may yield better profits  the cost of training personnel to adapt and use the model may be quite expensive suggesting a preference for the simpler model in terms of overall profit margin. a similar set of problems hold in the biomedical context - a practicing clinician often prefers an easily interpretable model for disease diagnosis over a slightly more accurate black box modeling tool. are these instances examples of successes or failures  similarly  a tool that outputs 1 patterns  potential hypothesis  that bear further experimental validation is not very useful by itself to an experimental biologist  since the experimental validation of even 1 of those patterns may consume the better part of their career! another topic of interest here is to highlight some of the classic mistakes made in the field. topics of interest here could range from the use of non-representative training data to the ignorance of population drift when modeling timevarying data  from not accounting for errors in data or labels in the model to an over reliance on a single technique for the task on hand and from asking the wrong question in the context of the application driver to sampling without care. a related topic here might be to think about the role of benchmark datasets and algorithms  and reflect on the general importance and requirement for repeatable and reproducible results.
1. outlook
　each success only buys an admission ticket to a more difficult problem. - henry kissinger.
　early success in any new field typically point to the plucking of low-hanging fruit. following up on success  early or late  is inevitably harder. how then can we build on our successes of the last eighteen years as we tackle new and exciting problems over the next eighteen  what are the important problems brought to light as a result of our past successes 
failure is success if we learn from it - malcolm forbes.
　this section of the panel will also include a discussion on insights gleaned from failures of the past. in other words what can we learn from our mistakes and failures  moving forward what errors and mishaps can we avoid and how can we ensure that such failures do not recur 
　as part of this section of the discussion  panelists will be asked to identify and suggest topics or areas of research that in their opinion are worth pursuing. similarly they may also reflect on topics they consider solved or are best left alone  i.e.  not that important in their opinion. panelists will also be asked to identify emerging technologies in hardware  e.g. multicore processors  and software as well as emerging application areas  that they feel are particularly important and are likely to have an impact on the field as we move forward.
1. panel format
　the terms  success  and  failure  often convey fuzzy semantics that are open to interpretation. as part of the discussion  it is expected that panelists will offer their thoughts on the aforementioned questions while defining their interpretation of these terms in the context of particular domains. after an initial round of discussions by the panelists  the floor will then be opened to an interactive session with the audience. finally  panelists will be asked to conclude their presentations with their outlook on how one can learn from the successes and failures of the past 1+ years and what in their opinion are the critical opportunities for the field in the future.
1. panelist biographies
　in this section we include brief biographies of the distinguished panelists.
　dr. pavel berkhin earned his ph.d. in mathematics from the institute of mathematics  novosibirsk  ussr  under the supervision of professor sergey sobolev. he has worked on theoretical challenges facing search technologies including link-based spam detection  personalization  and new ways for pagerank computing. he is currently a vice president of data mining and research with yahoo!. his group is involved in diversified efforts to utilize yahoo! data  from the development of yahoo! data mining platform to anomaly detection  from behavioral targeting to modeling for search advertisement  and from studies of user adoption patterns to keyword set expansions. prior to yahoo!  dr. berkhin was chief scientist with accrue software  inc.  a web analysis company  and a chief scientist of neo vista  inc.  a provider of industrial data mining software.
　dr. john elder obtained a bs and me in electrical engineering from rice university  and a phd in systems engineering from the university of virginia  where he has recently been an adjunct professor  teaching optimization. he currently heads elder research inc.  a company that focuses on scientific and commercial applications of pattern discovery and optimization  including stock selection  image recognition  medical text mining  biometric identification  drug efficacy  credit scoring  cross-selling  investment timing  and fraud detection. he has authored innovative data mining tools and is active in statistics  engineering  and finance conferences and boards. he is also a frequent keynote conference speaker  and was a program co-chair of the 1 sigkdd conference. he was honored by being selected to serve for 1 years on a panel appointed by the president to guide the national security agency on technology.
　dr. christos faloutsos  received his bs from the national technical university of athens in electrical engineering and ms and phd degrees in computer science from the university of toronto. he is currently a professor at carnegie mellon university. he has received the presidential young investigator award by the national science foundation  1   the research contributions award in icdm 1  ten best paper  awards  and several teaching awards. he has served as a member of the executive committee of sigkdd; he has published over 1 refereed articles  1 book chapters and one monograph. he holds five patents and has given over 1 tutorials and 1 invited distinguished lectures. his research interests include data mining for streams and graphs  fractals  database performance  and indexing for multimedia and bio-informatics data.
panel
　dr. jiawei han received his phd from the university of wisconsin in computer science in 1. he is currently a professor  at the department of computer science in the university of illinois at urbana-champaign. he has been working on research into data mining  data warehousing  database systems  data mining from spatiotemporal data  multimedia data  stream and rfid data  web data  social network data  and biological data  with over 1 journal and conference publications. he has chaired or served on over 1 program committees of international conferences and workshops  including pc co-chair of 1  ieee  international conference on data mining  icdm   americas coordinator of 1 international conference on very large data bases  vldb . he is also serving as the founding editor-inchief of acm transactions on knowledge discovery from data. he is an acm fellow and has received 1 acm sigkdd innovations award and 1 ieee computer society technical achievement award. his book  data mining: concepts and techniques  1nd ed.  morgan kaufmann  1  has been popularly used as a textbook worldwide.
　dr. haym hirsh received his bs degree from the mathematics and computer science departments at ucla and his ms and phd from the computer science department at stanford university. he is a professor of computer science at rutgers university  and has also held visiting positions at bar-ilan university  cmu  mit  nyu  and the university of zurich. he is currently director of the division of information and intelligent systems at the u.s. national science foundation's directorate for computer and information science and engineering. haym's research is on foundations and applications of machine learning  data mining  and information retrieval.
