data mining techniques extract interesting patterns out of large data resources. meaningful visualization and interactive exploration of patterns are crucial for knowledge discovery. visualization techniques exist for traditional clustering in low dimensional spaces. in high dimensional data  clusters typically only exist in subspace projections. this subspace clustering  however  lacks interactive visualization tools. challenges arise from typically large result sets in different subspace projections that hinder comparability  visualization and understandability.
　in this work  we describe morpheus  a tool that supports the knowledge discovery process through visualization and interactive exploration of subspace clusterings. users may browse an overview of the entire subspace clustering  analyze subspace cluster characteristics in-depth and zoom into object groupings. bracketing of different parameter settings enables users to immediately see the effects of parameters and to provide feedback to further improve the subspace clustering. furthermore  morpheus may serve as a teaching and exploration tool for the data mining community to visually assess different subspace clustering paradigms.
categories and subject descriptors: h.1 database management: database applications  data mining  general terms: management
keywords: data mining  high-dimensional data  interactive visualization tool  subspace clustering
1. introduction
　in applications such as life sciences  e-commerce  mobile information and communication  more and more data is produced that requires mining for knowledge discovery purposes. in many cases  data objects are described by many different attributes. in such high dimensional data  the so called  curse of dimensionality  poses a major challenge for data mining . more specifically  clusters cannot be detected due to the increasingly similar distances between ob-
copyright is held by the author/owner s .
kdd'1  august 1  1  las vegas  nevada  usa. acm 1-1-1/1
jects. as clustering aims to group similar objects while separating dissimilar ones  traditional clustering algorithms are thus hindered by irrelevant dimensions. these irrelevant dimensions differ from cluster to cluster; consequently  there are no globally irrelevant dimensions that could be removed. recently  subspace clustering research tackles this challenge by removing locally irrelevant dimensions per cluster. subspace clustering successfully detects patterns in subspace projections of high dimensional data. these patterns have to be intuitively presented to the user for knowledge extraction. with morpheus we present a tool for intuitive representation and interactive exploration to tackle three major challenges of subspace clustering analysis:
c1 comparison and analysis of clusters in arbitrary subspace projections
c1 succinct presentation of even very large result sets for overview and in-depth studies
c1 visual support and feedback features for parametrization
morpheus uses the cognitive abilities of human users to transfer the detected subspace cluster patterns to actual knowledge about the high dimensional data analyzed. morpheus thus completes the final steps of the kdd  knowledge discovery in databases  process for subspace clustering  cf. figure 1 .

figure 1: kdd flow in morpheus
　the morpheus system provides visualization and interactive exploration of subspace clusters  as well as feedback on parametrization and subsequent subspace clustering improvement. morpheus builds on our previous work on comparison and representation in   providing hands on assessment of subspace clusters using the suggested measures. additionally  it offers novel exploration features with feedback for parametrization and analysis of different subspace clustering algorithms. new 1-dimensional views allow for interactive browsing and focusing on interesting results.
1. morpheus
　morpheus is a subspace clustering visualization and analysis tool that offers both overview and in-depth exploration techniques.
1 visualization techniques
　morpheus provides visualization techniques to present subspace clustering results such that users can easily gain an overview of the detected patterns  as well as an in-depth understanding of individual subspace clusters and their mutual relationship.
　gaining a meaningful overview is crucial in allowing users to assess the overall subspace clustering result. as mentioned before  subspace clustering is inherently challenging as both the typical number of resulting subspace clusters is usually enormous as well as that clusters in different projections are difficult to understand. visualization techniques that were developed for full space clustering results rely on a common representation  i.e. no subspace projections . consequently  they cannot be applied to subspace clustering.
　our morpheus system thus contains specialized techniques for visualization of subspace clustering. 1d and 1d models are an adequate representation for human cognitive abilities. based on a recently developed comparison measure for subspace clusters the morpheus system provides an overview on the entire subspace clustering result by mds  multidimensional scaling  plots in both 1d and 1d . as illustrated in figures 1 and 1  mds approximates distances in high dimensional spaces by two or three dimensions. while the 1d representation is a static view that allows for easy reading  the 1d mds plots allow users to interactively explore the overall subspace clustering result. they may move around the 1d representation to focus on those subspace clusters they are most interested in. at any point  they may choose individual subspace clusters in the plot to obtain more detailed information.
　thus  mds plots in morpheus provide an overview on subspace clustering. moreover  it helps users in interactively determining the best parameter setting. for any subspace clustering algorithm  some core parameters tend to have a large influence on the resulting output. we therefore present a bracketing representation  i.e. a series of 1d mds plots for different parameters. users thus get a clear visual impression of the effect of parameters and may choose the best ones for a feedback loop that generates the desired subspace clustering.
　for in-depth analysis of any subspace clustering algorithm  representation of the key features of subspace clusters in a cognitively meaningful way is crucial. as subspace clustering results represent patterns in different projections by their very nature  visualization should contain information on the respective subspaces  the cluster values and additional information on the interestingness measures computed by the

figure 1: screenshot of morpheus application
subspace clustering algorithm. morpheus uses a color-coding scheme where the different axis in the hsv color space are used to represent different aspects of subspace clusters in a very compact and easy to understand manner . for easy navigation  subspace clusters can be zoomed into  and understood using a color legend on values of the subspace clusters.
1 interactive exploration
　the conceptual design for interactive exploration in morpheus is based on the visual exploration paradigm : starting from an overview over the subspace clustering result the user can navigate through the visualized patterns. by selecting subjectively interesting subspace clusters  the user may then obtain more detailed information where desired. detailed information is provided on three levels: for entire subspace clusterings  for single subspace clusters  as well as for individual objects. based on the discovered knowledge  the user can give feedback to the system for further improved results. this feedback loop enables the system to use the cognitive abilities of humans for better parameter settings and thus for meaningful subspace clusters.

figure 1: detailed 1d view in morpheus　overview browsing. interactive exploration in morpheus starts from an overview of all mined subspace clusters in which the user can browse. the automatically detected patterns are thus presented to the user for a general impression of the result and a comparison of the resulting subspace clusters. as clusters are detected in arbitrary subspaces  they cannot be compared based on the full space dimensionality. morpheus thus incorporates a distance function that takes the main characteristics of subspace clusters  their subspace dissimilarity and object dissimilarity into account for visualization in an mds plot . based on such an overall distance function  subspace clusters can be intuitively represented as circles in a 1d or 1d space  figure 1 . this approximation of the original high dimensional information to a 1d or 1d representation  allows human users to easily understand the result just by the visual impression. morpheus enriches this mds information by additional visual features. the size of a subspace cluster is represented as the diameter of the circle. its dimensionality is encoded by the color of the circle. this information allows users to identify similar subspace clusters  those clusters of similar dimensionality  or of similar size  or to study the overall distribution of these characteristics in the result for further analysis.
　subspace cluster details. selecting a subspace cluster in this 1d or 1d representation by clicking on it  the user gets more detailed information which is presented in a second pop-up window. in this window  the data distribution inside the selected subspace cluster is visualized via box-plots. for each dimension the median  the 1% quantiles and minimum/maximum values are presented. as a characteristic information for subspace clusters  the relevant dimensions  i.e. the respective subspace projections  are highlighted in red. for the irrelevant dimensions  that are not part of the subspace projection  we may observe a scattered distribution in the values  while in the relevant dimensions the data is clustered to a tighter value range. having this information at hand  the user can investigate the quality and internal structure of the grouping of the objects in such subspace clusters and thus discover knowledge about the underlying structure of the data.
　parameter bracketing. parameter setting is in general a difficult task for most data mining algorithms. this is especially the case for unsupervised techniques like clustering  where typically no prior knowledge about the data is available. this inherent problem of clustering is even more present in subspace clustering as the user has to provide parametrization for detecting clusters in different subspaces. in general the problem can be solved by guessing a parameter setting  looking at the result and then trying to choose a better parameter setting. to speed up this tedious process for users and give them more information to base their parameter choice on  morpheus visualizes a set of different subspace clusters at once  called bracketing of different parameter settings for direct feedback. this means that users obtain a series of mds plots  cf. upper part of figure 1  from which they pick the most appropriate one s  for subsequent runs of the subspace clustering algorithms. by directly comparing the results of different parameter settings  parametrization is no longer a guess  but becomes an informed decision based on the visual analysis of the effects of parameters. moreover  this process is far more comfortable for users and allows reaching the desired subspace clustering result in fewer steps.
　direct subspace cluster comparison. for a more detailed analysis of two different parameter settings the user can select two clusterings out of the presented series of mds plots by clicking on them in the bracketing representation. these two subspace clusterings are then presented as larger plots in the lower part of the cluster overview screen in morpheus. once again  detailed information for the subspace clusters can be obtain by picking individual subspace clusters.
　1d browsing. for the overview browsing morpheus provides static 1-dimensional mds plots. these static views provide a fixed perspective for easy comparison. for indepth browsing  where focusing to different parts of the subspace clustering is of interest  a flexible navigation through mds plots is provided in the morpheus tool. 1-dimensional mds plot browsing allows users to shift  rotate and zoom into the mds plot using standard 1-dimensional input devices or 1-dimensional input devices that allow for even more intuitive navigation. the user may thus identify similar or dissimilar subspace clusters that are of specific interest. in figure 1  a 1-dimensional mds plot is rotated in 1  steps around the z-axis.
　object ranking. upon selection of an interesting subspace clustering from the 1d and 1d overview browsing  the user can analyze this clustering in-depth on the object level. in the overview mds plots  the objects are summarized by circles. for detail information on the objects and their characteristics  morpheus provides an object ranking visualization technique which both provides information on the values of the objects in the cluster  as well as on the most relevant objects for the subspace clustering. the color coding  illustrated in figure 1  uses the hsv color space  where the axes for saturation and value correspond to the interestingness measure according to the subspace clustering  i.e. interesting subspace clusters show up in bright and intensive colors in their relevant dimensions. their value is represented as the hue axes in hsv colors. irrelevant dimensions are denoted in black for easier reading. as subspace clusters may be large  morpheus allows for zooming into areas of interest via a scroll bar to the right  which moves a zoom area  depicted via yellow lines at top and bottom. individual objects can choose within this zoom area using the 1d or 1d input device. the user is then provided with information on the actual values of the object in question for most detailed analysis.
1. demonstration
　the demonstration setup for morpheus contains the above described tools  real world data sets  precomputed examples  as well as different subspace clustering algorithms. conference attendees may explore subspace clustering results or

figure 1: object ranking
see examples for different features and effects.
　data sets. we use real world data from the uci kdd archive . subspace clustering results on such real world data can be explored to find meaningful patterns in the data. various parameter settings for the different data sets can be compared by bracketing. on meaningful subspace clusterings  the user can perform an in-depth analysis to study the structure of the respective subspace clusters. possibly  even new or unexpected results are detected in data sets that conference attendees are familiar with.
　subspace clustering techniques. besides the comparison of subspace clusterings generated on different real world data and by different parameter settings  the morpheus demo includes various subspace clustering techniques from different clustering paradigms:
　as a grid-based subspace clustering algorithm  morpheus includes the pioneer in subspace clustering  clique . it discretizes the data space into grid cells for efficient bottomup processing by pruning cells which do not contain a minimum number of objects. a second grid-based algorithm in the morpheus demo is schism which extends clique to a variable threshold adapted to the dimensionality of the considered subspace .
　the morpheus demo includes projected clustering algorithms  that partition the objects in a search for disjoint clusters in the detected subspace projections. proclus iteratively refines a full-space k-medoid clustering in a top-down manner on the dimensionality of the subspace projections . also incorporated in the morpheus demo is a second partitioning technique  p1c  which combines one-dimensional cluster cores to higher-dimensional clusters bottom-up .
　density-based subspace clustering algorithms are available in morpheus as well. subclu mines subspace clusters in a bottom-up fashion using a monotonicity on the density assessment for pruning the search space . dusc normalizes the density with respect to the dimensionality of the subspace to remove dimensionality bias in monotonous density measures .
　extensibility and research impact. further subspace clustering algorithms can be incorporated by an open interface specific for subspace clustering techniques. new algorithms  which also follow the simple input and output formats defined in the morpheus system  can be easily plugged in for visualization and interactive exploration.
　morpheus may serve as a basis for teaching and research in the subspace clustering community. it allows students and researchers alike to easily see the effects of parametrization or subspace clustering paradigms. easy extensibility makes morpheus an ideal tool for the development and study of new algorithms. consequently  morpheus may even spark new interest in the domain of subspace clustering.
acknowledgments
this research was funded in part by the cluster of excellence on ultra-high speed mobile information and communication  umic  of the dfg  german research foundation grant exc 1 .
