in an environment of distributed text collections  the first step in the information retrieval process is to identify which of all available collections are more relevant to a given query and which should thus be accessed to answer the query. we address the challenge of collection selection when there is full or partial overlap between the available text collections  a scenario which has not been examined previously despite its real-world applications. to that end  we present cosco  a collection selection approach which uses collection-specific coverage and overlap statistics. we describe our experimental results which show that the presented approach displays the desired behavior of retrieving more new results early on in the collection order  and performs consistently and significantly better than cori  previously considered to be one of the best collection selection systems.
poster recommended by www1 program committee.
categories and subject descriptors: h.1  information storage and retrieval : information search and retrieval - retrieval models  selection process
general terms: management
keywords: collection selection  collection overlap  statistics gathering
1. introduction
　with the recent emergence of meta-search engines  news meta-searchers  and bibliography search engines  it has become apparent that the challenge of retrieving relevant documents from a group of collections involves more than just searching every information source at hand and ranking the results afterwards. an effective system must first choose which collection or subset of collections to call to answer a given query. this particular process is generally referred to as collection selection. this is especially important because redundant or irrelevant calls can be expensive in terms of query execution cost  post-query processing  i.e. duplicate removal and results merging   network load  source load  etc. naturally  as the number of collections increase  effective collection selection becomes essential for the performance of the overall retrieval system.
　the general trend in the existing approaches for collection selection  is to evaluate the  goodness  of each collection based on some type of information about term  document  and/or collection frequencies. in other words  these ap-
copyright is held by the author/owner.
www 1  may 1  1  chiba  japan.
acm 1-1/1.
proaches require some term frequency statistics about each collection in order to select the sources they deem relevant to the query. this general strategy works fairly well when the collections do not overlap. however  because all of these approaches fail to take into account overlap between collections when determining their collection order  they may decide to call a collection which has no - or very few - new documents  considering the documents which have already been retrieved at that moment . take for example the case of two mirror collections. if one is deemed highly relevant  the other one would also be highly relevant  and hence both collections would be called even though calling the second one does not provide any new results.
　evidently a collection selection approach which could prevent unnecessary collection accesses would be useful and probably complementary to the existing approaches. our motivation was thus to design a system able to order the collections such that when a collection is accessed  it is the collection which would provide the most new results. to do so  our system must be capable of making two types of predictions:  a  how likely a collection is to have relevant documents  and  b  whether a collection is useful given the ones already selected.
　this paper presents our collection selection approach  called1cosco  which uses information on the coverage of individual collections to predict the first point  and information on the overlap between collections to predict the second point. while it is easy to see that coverage and overlap information regarding the collections will help in the collection selection  the open issue is how to efficiently gather this information.
1. the cosco approach
　cosco is essentially composed of an offline component which gathers statistics from collections and an online component which uses the statistics at runtime to determine the collection ranking for a new incoming query.
1 the offline component
　the offline component must first obtain the appropriate coverage and overlap information from the collections for a set of training queries. overlap between two text collections means that some documents are highly similar  as opposed to strictly identical. the complexity of computation is thus mainly affected by the two following observations. first  collection overlap is non-symmetric  in that a single result in collection c1 could very well be highly similar to several

results in c1. second  document overlap is not transitive  as a document in c1 can overlap with document d1 in c1 as well as with document d1 in c1  even though d1 is not highly similar to d1.
　to address these inherent challenges  we compute overlap between two collections for a particular keyword query as follows: for each collection  the documents returned for the query are put into a single bag of keywords. then  the similarity between the keyword bags is used to approximate overlap between the two collections for that particular query. furthermore  we only compute pairwise overlaps between collections. in addition to overlap statistics  the offline component also retrieves coverage statistics  which simply refers to the number of documents a collection returns for a specific query. both coverage and overlap statistics are collected using a list of past queries.
　next  the offline component identifies frequent item sets among the previously asked queries. finally it computes new statistics corresponding to each item set by averaging the statistics for each query that contains the item set. the justification for the frequent item set computation is that by storing statistics with respect to item sets  we can effectively map at runtime new queries to a set of item sets for which we store statistics  and then use these to approximate statistics for the new query.
1 the online component
　the online component encompasses three phases. first the incoming query must be mapped to a set of item sets for which the system has statistics. the mapping is accomplished by determining which group of item sets covers most  if not all  of the query. second  coverage and overlap statistics for the query are computed by averaging the statistics of all mapped item sets.
　finally  using these estimated query statistics  the system determines which collections to call and in what order. the first collection selected is simply the one with highest estimated coverage. the next collections are selected by determining which one would lead to the largest remaining result set document  taking into account the estimated overlap between collections. more formally  at each step k we select collection cl such that
l =       		qnew	i  for k = 1 :	argmax	coverage	 c  
i for k   1 :
     argmax|riqnew|   pcj（s overlapqnew ci cj 
i
where riq is the bag corresponding to the union of the result documents for query q from collection ci  and s is the set of already selected collections. more details of our approach are contained in .
1. experimental results
　in order to determine how well cosco performed in an environment of overlapping text collections  we set up a collection test bed as well as a set of queries and compared the respective performances of cosco  cori  which is a leading approach for collection selection    and an oracle-like collection selection strategy which truly knows which are the best collections to access. the collection test bed was composed of 1 real online collections  acm digital library  acm guide  sciencedirect  compendex  citeseer  and the cs bibliography  and 1 synthetic collections  which were

figure 1: performance of oracular  cori  cosco  and a variation of our approach on the 1-collection test bed.
created with the intent of having both a relatively large test bed and a controlled degree of overlap between the collections. in this setup  the documents were essentially publications containing title  abstract  author names  etc. the list of queries consisted of 1 distinct real user queries gathered by the bibfinder mediator  1  1 .
　cosco's offline component used 1% of the query-list to probe each collection  identify frequent item sets in the training query-list  and gather coverage and overlap statistics for the online component to use. the remaining 1% of the query-list were then used to test all three collection selection approaches. we kept track of the cumulative number of new1 results retrieved in terms of the number of collections called  in order to analyze to what degree each approach was able to retrieve more results in the first few collections called. figure 1 displays the cumulative plots of the different approaches  and illustrates how cosco usually retrieved more results than cori in the same number of collection calls. more experimental results are given in .
1. conclusion and future work
　probably the most interesting direction of future work follows from the fact that in our approach the relevance of the results from each collection does not guide at all the final collection ranks. therefore an interesting extension attempts to design a collection selection system which would take into account both the content-based relevance of the documents and/or collections  as well as the overlap between the collections. this essentially considers our work as a complementary strategy to those that have been proposed in the literature  and preliminary work on the subject seems to point to a promising system.
