memory-based approaches for collaborative filtering identify the similarity between two users by comparing their ratings on a set of items. in the past  the memory-based approaches have been shown to suffer from two fundamental problems: data sparsity and difficulty in scalability. alternatively  the model-based approaches have been proposed to alleviate these problems  but these approaches tends to limit the range of users. in this paper  we present a novel approach that combines the advantages of these two kinds of approaches by introducing a smoothing-based method.  in our approach  clusters generated from the training data provide the basis for data smoothing and neighborhood selection. as a result  we provide higher accuracy as well as increased efficiency in recommendations. empirical studies on two datasets  eachmovie and movielens  show that our new proposed approach consistently outperforms other state-of-the-art collaborative filtering algorithms.   
categories and subject descriptors 
h.1  information search and retrieval : information search and retrieval - information filtering 
general terms: algorithms  performance  experimentation keywords: collaborative filtering  sparsity data  smoothing  clustering.  
1. introduction 
collaborative filtering predicts the interest of items for an active user based on the aggregated rating information of the likeminded users in a historical database. the key idea is that the active user will prefer those items that like-minded people prefer  or even that dissimilar people don't prefer. two types of algorithms for collaborative filtering have been studied: memorybased and model-based. memory-based algorithms perform the computation on the entire database to identify the top k most similar users to the active user from the training database in terms of the rating patterns and then combines those ratings together. notable examples include the pearson-correlation based approach   the vector similarity based approach   and the extended generalized vector-space model . these approaches focused on utilizing the existing rating of a training user as the features. however  the memory-based method suffers from two fundamental problems: data sparsity and inability to scale up. data sparsity refers to the difficulty that most users rate only a small number of items and hence a very sparse user-item matrix is available. as a result  the accuracy of the method is often quite poor. as for computational scalability  algorithms based on memory-based approaches often cannot cope well with the large numbers of users and items.  
in contrast to the memory-based approaches  model-based approaches group different users in the training database into a small number of classes based on their rating patterns. in order to predict the rating from an active user on a particular item  these approaches first categorize the active user into one or more of the predefined user classes and use the rating of the predicted classes on the targeted item as the prediction. algorithms within this category include bayesian network approach   clustering approach  and the aspect models .the model-based approaches are often time-consuming to build and update  and cannot cover as diverse a user range as the memory-based approaches do.  
in this paper  we propose a novel framework for collaborative filtering which combines the strengths of memory-based approaches and model-based approaches in order to enable recommendation by groups of closely related individuals. our method uses the clusters as the computed groups and smoothes the unrated data for individual users. the use of clusters for smoothing permits the integration of the advantages from both the 

 
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  or republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
memory-based and model-based approaches. by using the rating information from a group of closely related users  unrated items of the individual user in a group can be predicted; this allows the missing values to be filled in. moreover  assuming that the nearest neighbor should be also in top n most similar clusters to the 

sigir'1  august 1  1  salvador  brazil. 
copyright 1 acm 1-1/1...$1. 


*this work was conducted while the first author was doing internship at microsoft research asia. 

active user  we need only select the nearest neighbors in the set of the top n clusters.  this enables the system to be scalable.  
in the rest of the paper  we provide a brief description of several major approaches for collaborative filtering and the related work. in section 1  we propose general framework for collaborative filtering. the results of empirical studies are presented in section 1  followed by conclusion in section 1.  
1. background 
in this section  we review several major approaches for collaborative filtering.  
1 collaborative filtering 
1.1 memory-based approaches  
the memory-based approaches  are among the most popular prediction techniques in collaborative filtering. the basic idea is to compute the active user's predicted vote of an item as a weighted average of votes by other similar users or k nearest neighbors  knn . two commonly used memory-based algorithms are the pearson correlation coefficient  pcc  algorithm  and the vector space similarity  vss  algorithm . these two approaches differ in the computation of similarity. as described in   the pcc algorithm generally achieves higher performance than vector-space similarity method.  
1.1 model-based approaches 
