this paper investigates basic research issues that need to be addressed for developing an architecture that enables repurposing of learning objects in a flexible way. currently  there are a number of learning object content models  e.g. the scorm content aggregation model  that define learning objects and their components in a more or less precise way. however  these models do not allow repurposing of fine-grained components  sentences  images... . we developed an ontology-based solution for content repurposing. the ontology is a solid basis for an architecture that will enable on-the-fly access to learning object components and that will facilitate repurposing these components.  
categories and subject descriptors 
k.1  computing milieux : computers and education; h.1.m 
 information storage and retrieval : miscellaneous general terms: learning objects keywords: content models  metadata  ontologies  repurposing 
 
1. introduction 
learning objects  los  and their reusability are one of the most important current research topics in the learning technology community . reusability of los is conventionally regarded as the use of entire los in different contexts. the learning object metadata  lom  standard  provides a set of metadata elements for describing los: this facilitates finding relevant los. however  in many cases we need to reuse specific parts of a lo  rather then the lo as a whole. in such situations  current practice is to copy & paste in order to reuse specifically those parts of a document  e.g. a definition  an example or an illustration  that are relevant. however  this can be rather tedious and time-consuming. more important  such an approach is non-scalable in terms of maintenance  since each time you copy a content unit  a new place is created that needs to be maintained. our goal is to release authors from the task of reusing parts of los manually  by automating that process as much as possible. therefore  we need a lo content format that includes an explicit definition of the structure of the lo. we developed an ontology that provides an explicit definition of the lo content structure  formally specifying both lo component types and relationships between those components. furthermore  we need tools for extracting/transforming lo content into this ontology content format  we call those tools disaggregators  as well as tools for 
 
copyright is held by the author/owner s . 
www 1  may 1  1  chiba  japan. acm 1-1/1. 
 
repurposing ontology-aware content in real-world applications. this approach will enable not only repurposing of complete los  but also the retrieval and repurposing of relevant components.   
in the next section  we briefly outline the alocom ontology. section 1 illustrates the role of the ontology in the process of authoring learning materials. section 1 elaborates on tool support and conclusions and remarks on future work conclude this paper. 
1. the alocom ontology 
we developed a generic content model  alocom  that defines los and their components . the model differentiates between content fragments  cf   content objects  co   and learning objects  lo . cfs are content units in their most basic form  like text  audio and video. basically  cfs are raw digital resources. they can be further specialized into discrete  graphic  text  image  and continuous  audio  video  simulation and animation  elements. cos aggregate cfs and add navigation. navigation elements should enable proper structuring of cfs within a co. besides cfs  a co can include other cos as well. at the next aggregation level  a lo is defined as a collection of cos with an associated learning objective. 
we defined content types for each of these components. we introduced cf types such as images  text  audio and video. for defining co types  we investigated existing information architectures  like the information block architecture  developed by dr. horn and the ibm darwin information typing architecture . these architectures define information types  e.g. concept  principle  task  and their building blocks  e.g. example  definition  analogy . as a starting point  we defined co types and their structure using dita concepts  since dita is a recent architecture with rich documentation and online support . besides cf and co types  the ontology identifies lo types. for now  only a slide presentation type is defined. finally  the ontology defines the relationships between the lo components. both aggregation and navigation relations are specified. for more details about the ontology  we refer to . 
1. the role of the ontology in the authoring process  
1a teacher  or another kind of author  uses an authoring tool to produce learning materials for students. since our aim is to facilitate the process of learning content authoring  we provide the teacher with the technology that enables him/her to reuse existing components deposed in lors. in our model  the lor should provide access not only to complete los  but also to smaller components  i.e. cos and cfs as they are defined in alocom. in order to have lors with alocom ontology-aware content  we transform los into a form compliant with the alocom ontology. that is why we need tools we call disaggregators. they take as input los in any domain/tool specific format and convert them into an alocom compliant output format. having learning content disaggregated to the level of a single image  text fragment or audio/video clip  we enable more flexible content reuse and make the process of composing new learning materials more lightweight and less time consuming. of course  our intent is not to engage a teacher in the process of searching for and putting together numerous content fragments. instead he/she must have technical support that automatically searches the lor for a particular image  example  definition or table and assembles them into a meaningful learning unit. finally  the teacher can refine and fine-tune the learning material thus generated. of course  the author can also add new content to the assembly of reused components. further  this kind of scenario demands for semantic annotations of los  both content and metadata  for details see   deposited in lors. those annotations should be in accordance with domain ontologies. therefore  we argue for content structuring according to the alocom ontology as well as for its semantic markup compliant with appropriate domain ontologies.  
suppose a teacher is preparing a course on the darwin evolution theory. for such a course   s he needs textual descriptions  images  some summary tables and possibly some video clips. the conventional approach is to search lors for domain relevant los  browse through obtained files  mark useful components  text  image etc.   copy & paste those components into the lo under construction and finally fine-tune the assembly. in the approach that we propose  the author selects the most relevant components from the automatically determined set prepared for him/her and defines their correct sequence. the author can enhance the generated materials  e.g. giving his/her own overview of the evolution process  provide students with additional readings in the form of footnotes or give an example. 
1. tool support  
we need tools for extracting/transforming lo content into ontology-aware content as well as tools for repurposing ontologyaware content in new applications.  
1. creating ontology-aware content 
extracting alocom aware content from the content produced by real-world authoring tools  e.g. ms powerpoint  openoffice.org etc.  is a complex task since it must consider a huge variety of source formats and implementation techniques. most tools use their own  vendor-specific  format for storing learning materials. although the great majority of them support other formats through an export function  it is often the case that information is lost when exporting tool-specific formats  e.g. ms word  into other formats  e.g. openoffice.org . our goal is to develop a tool that maps all different tool-specific formats into the alocom format. this task requires knowledge of the internal organization  i.e. structure  of the format we are mapping into the ontologyaware content. for content authoring tools that have their own api  e.g. microsoft's .net api for the ms office tools   we use this api to retrieve both content and structure of their documents.  for other formats like html and pdf  we can use java parsers to retrieve the same information.  finally  instances of the alocom ontology are created using jena - a java-based framework for the semantic web . 
1. repurposing ontology-aware content 
