currently most link-related applications treat all links in the same web page to be identical. one link-related application usually requires one certain property of hyperlinks but actually not all links have this property or they have this property on different levels. based on a study of how human users judge the links  the idea of the link function classification  lfc  is introduced in this paper. the link functions reflect the purpose that links are created by web page designers and the way they are used by viewers. links in a certain function class imply one certain relationship between the adjacent pages  and thus they can be assumed to have similar properties. an algorithm is proposed to analyze the link functions based on both vision and structure features which simulates the reaction on the links of human users. current applications can be enhanced by lfc with a more accurate modeling of the web graph. new mining methods can be also developed by making more and stronger assumptions on links within each function class due to the purer property set they share.  
categories and subject descriptors 
h.1  database management : database applications - data mining; h.1  information storage and retrieval : information search and retrieval; h.1  information interfaces and presentation : hypertext/hypermedia. 
general terms 
algorithms  performance  human factors. 
keywords 
link function classification  vision features  structure features  web mining. 
1. introduction 
one of the most fundamental differences between web pages and classical documents is that the web pages are hyperlinked to each other  while mining based on hyperlinks has always been an important and effective idea among both webpage-related literatures and real applications. 
currently most link-related applications assume that all links within a certain web page are identical in terms of their utilities and thus the web is modeled as a single-link-typed directed graph. but hyperlinks are not actually the same for human users. intuitively  page designers put hyperlinks in their webpages for different purposes  while viewers judge and predict each link they see. for example  in the link analysis  all links in a page are assumed to be clicked with the same probability  or imply the same level of recommendation  but actually some of the links are generally more attractive to the viewer. some applications such as  require each link to be a sign of content similarity of the target page  but usually cannot tell which links point to more similar pages without visiting the targets - although this prediction is generally easy for human users. some methods are proposed to solve these problems. most of them  such as   use clues directly extracted from the dom structure. however  the underlying dom tree is usually biased from and much more complicated than the visual representation of the page  especially after the introduction of wysiwyg html editors. so the structure clues do not always reflect the human designers and viewers. in  the vision clues are regarded  but like other methods  it finds a global importance level  or ranking  for links  which is not portable. for example  links of high importance in link analysis do not necessarily leads to high similarity. these motivate us to analyze the functions of links to generate a precise web graph  and try to find the classes and features that match real human users. 
1. link function classification 
the main problem with the single-link-typed web graph is that one application usually requires one certain property of hyperlinks  or one certain relationship between the two linked webpages  but actually not all hyperlinks have this property or they have this property on different levels. designers set up different hyperlinks for different purposes  which conceal different relationships between the linked pages. on the other hand  it is reasonable that links set up for the same purpose share similar properties. so analyzing the link by functions evidently better fits the real web. 
1 major link functions 
the major link functions are summarized based on study of human behaviors. we examined many webpages to find out for what purposes that hyperlinks are put in webpages. five main functions for hyperlinks are summarized: 
1. structural and navigating. these links form the hierarchical structure of a website  letting viewers navigate to different parts or topics of the website  or providing some functions over the whole website  such as the  login  entries .  
1. indexing and directory. they are used as portals to other pages  or providing some function only for the current page. a series of links of this class are often organized together as a list providing a series of choices for viewers.  

 
*this work is partly supported by nsfc  grant no. 1  and the national 1 high-tech r&d program of china  grant no. 1aa1 . 
 
copyright is held by the author/owner s . 
www 1   april 1  1  beijing  china. acm 1-1-1/1. 
 
1. citing and explanation. they provide extra information about a term mentioned in the page content  such as the explanation of a concept  or details of an event. 
1. recommending and expanding. they provide information in which the viewer of the current page may be also interested. 

1
www 1 / poster paper	april 1  1 ¡¤ beijing  china

the target pages may be discussing the same or related subjects  or introducing other valuable stuffs to the viewer.  
1. advertising and commercial. these links are just used for commercial purpose and their target pages usually have little relationship with the containing page. 
compared with the importance level approaches  our function classes are more objectively and impersonally defined so that one can easily tell the function of a link without ambiguity. while the functions of different links have determined  link-related applications can be enhanced with a more precise modeling of the web graph or they can mine on purer web sub-graphs where all links share similar properties. 
the advertising class is usually easy to identify by url based rules  and there are already such methods in use. we now focus only on the first four classes  which are intuitively much more informative but cannot be handled by simple rule based methods. 
1 methodology 
we use supervised machine learning to train classifiers based on a couple of link features. as a supplement to the common features directly extracted from the dom structure  we adopt some vision features to describe human reaction of the link. the features we used are as follows: 
vision features: consist of the spatial features and content features. spatial features describe the hyperlinks' spatial appearance in browsers rather than the position in the dom tree  including the position of the link and the position and size of the vision block containing the link. the vision blocks are obtained by the vips algorithm . the content features include the number of characters in the anchor text and the size of image in the link. 
structure features: provide heuristics on the interaction of the link object and the webpage context in which it lies  including: whether the link is in list or heading; character distances to neighboring links; and character distances to neighboring line-end characters. 
whole page features: heuristics implying the type of the webpage  which may determine the distribution of the link types it contains to a certain extent  including: statistics on the webpage size  text lengths and image sizes. 
two types of classifiers are used: svm and decision tree. svm can be used for both soft and hard classification. for the soft classification case  a distribution over all the class labels  rather than an absolute determination  is obtained for the link indicating the probability of level that the link belongs to each class  which is a more precise description of the link function. decision trees are for hard classification only  but they naturally handle multi-class problems and perform much better in the imbalanced case  i.e. some classes cover only a minor part of the whole sample space. 
1. experiments 
we conduct some experiments to show the performance of our proposed link function classification algorithm. to insure the diversity of the testing data set  we performed google searches with 1 popular terms and extracted all hyperlinks in top 1 results of each search. finally 1 out of the 1 results are available html pages and 1 visible hyperlinks are extracted. all these links are manually labeled by their major function class. table 1 summarizes the test data set. 
the proposed svm and decision tree classifier  as well as the decision tree based on only non-spatial features  are trained and table 1. summary of the experiment data 
classstruct. indexingciting recom. advert. num.1 1 1 1 1 table 1. accuracy of link function analysis algorithm 
 svm d. t. d. t. non-spatial p r p r p r struct.111  1  1 1 index.111  1  1 1 citing111  1  1 1 recom.111  1  1 1  
figure 1. link function classification demo application 
tested. the precision  p  and recall  r  of 1-fold cross-validation for each classifier are reported in table 1. the decision tree results are better than the svm  which agrees with former discussions. but decision trees produce only hard labels. most previous work dealing with link ranking use non-spatial features only  the experiment results show that the spatial features evidently improve the classification performance. the spatial features describe the actual visual representation of the link in browsers and are essential for human users to judge the link. a demo application was made upon the link function classification algorithm  and figure 1 shows one of the classification results. 
1. conclusion and future work 
we have introduced the idea of link function classification and proposed an algorithm to analysis the link functions based on both vision and structure features  which is a simulation of how human users treat and judge the links. we plan to apply the link function classification on some of the popular link applications and to develop more learning and mining methods on the link sub-graphs produced as our future work. 
