web 1 technology has enabled more and more people to freely express their opinions on the web  making the web an extremely valuable source for mining user opinions about all kinds of topics. in this paper we study how to automatically integrate opinions expressed in a well-written expert review with lots of opinions scattering in various sources such as blogspaces and forums. we formally define this new integration problem and propose to use semi-supervised topic models to solve the problem in a principled way. experiments on integrating opinions about two quite different topics  a product and a political figure  show that the proposed method is effective for both topics and can generate useful aligned integrated opinion summaries. the proposed method is quite general. it can be used to integrate a well written review with opinions in an arbitrary text collection about any topic to potentially support many interesting applications in multiple domains.
categories and subject descriptors: b.1  information search and retrieval : text mining
general terms: algorithms
keywords: opinion integration  semi-supervised  probabilistic topic modeling  expert review
1. introduction
모as web 1 applications become increasingly popular  more and more people express their opinions on the web in various ways such as customer reviews  forums  discussion groups  and weblogs. the wide coverage of topics and abundance of opinions make the web an extremely valuable source for mining user opinions about all kinds of topics  e.g.  products  political figures  etc. . however  with such a large scale of information source  it is quite challenging for a user to integrate and digest all the opinions from different sources.
모in general  for any given topic  e.g.  a product   there are often two kinds of opinions: the first is opinions expressed in some well-structured relatively complete review typically written by some expert about the topic and the second is fragmental opinions scattering around in all kinds of sources such as blog articles and forums. for convenience of discussion  we will refer to the first kind as expert opinions and the second ordinary opinions. the expert opinions are relatively easy for a user to access through some opinion search
copyright is held by the international world wide web conference committee  iw1 . distribution of these papers is limited to classroom use  and personal use by others.
www 1  april 1  1  beijing  china. acm 1-1-1/1.
website such as cnet. because a comprehensive product review is often written carefully  it is also easy for a user to digest expert opinions. however  finding  integrating  and digesting ordinary opinions pose significant challenges as they are scattering in many different sources  and are generally fragmental and not well structured. while expert opinions are clearly very useful  they may be biased and often out of date after a while. in contrast  ordinary opinions tend to represent the general opinions of a large number of people and get refreshed quickly as people dynamically generate new content. for example  a query  iphone  returns 1 matches in google's blogsearch  as of nov. 1  1   suggesting that there are many opinions expressed about iphone in blog articles within a short period of time since it hit the market. to enable a user to benefit from both kinds of opinions  it is thus necessary to automatically integrate these two kinds of opinions and present an integrated opinion summary to a user.
모to the best of our knowledge  such an integration problem has not been studied in the existing work. in this paper  we study how to integrate a well-written expert review about an arbitrary topic with many ordinary opinions expressed in a text collection such as blog articles. we propose a general method to solve this integration problem in three steps:  1  extract ordinary opinions from text using information retrieval;  1  summarize and align the extracted opinions to the expert review to integrate the opinions;  1  further separate ordinary opinions that are similar to expert opinions from those that are not. our main idea is to take advantage of the high readability of the expert review to structure the unorganized ordinary opinions while at the same time summarizing the ordinary opinions to extract representative opinions using the expert review as guidance. from the viewpoint of text data mining  we are essentially to use the expert review as a  template  to mine text data for ordinary opinions. the first step in our approach can be implemented with a direct application of information retrieval techniques. implementing the second and third steps involves special challenges. in particular  without any training data  it is unclear how we should align ordinary opinions to an expert review and separate similar and supplementary opinions. we propose a semi-supervised topic modeling approach to solve these challenges. specifically  we cast the expert review as a prior in a probabilistic topic model  i.e.  plsa  and fit the model to the text collection with the ordinary opinions with maximum a posterior  map  estimation. with the estimated probabilistic model  we can then naturally obtain alignments of opinions as well as additional ordinary opinions that cannot be well-aligned with the expert review. the separation of similar and supplementary opinions can also be achieved with a similar model. we evaluate our method on integrating opinions about two quite different topics. one is a popular product  iphone   and the other is a popular political figure barack obama. experiment results show that our method can effectively integrate the expert review  a produce review from cnet for iphone and a short biography from wikipedia for barack obama  with ordinary opinions from blog articles. this paper makes the following contributions:
1. we define a new problem of opinion integration. tothe best of our knowledge  there is no existing work that solves this problem.
1. we propose a new semi-supervised topic modeling approach for integrating opinions scattered around in text articles with those in a well-written expert review for an arbitrary topic.
1. we evaluate the proposed method both qualitativelyand quantitatively. the results show that our method is effective for integrating opinions about quite different topics.
모collecting and digesting opinions about a topic is critical for many tasks such as shopping  medical decision making  and social interactions. our proposed method is quite general and can be applied to integrate opinions about any topic in any domain  thus potentially has many interesting applications.
모the rest of the paper is organized as follows. in section 1  we formally define the novel problem of opinion integration. after that  we present our semi-supervised topic model in section 1. we discuss our experiments and results in section 1. finally  we conclude in section 1.
1. problem definition
모in this section  we define the novel problem of opinion integration.
given an expert review about a topic t  e.g.  iphone or
 barack obama   and a collection of text articles  e.g.  blog articles   our goal is to extract opinions from text articles and integrate them with those in the expert review to form an integrated opinion summary.
모the expert review is generally well-written and coherent  thus we can view it as a sequence of semantically coherent segments  where a segment could be a sentence  a paragraph  or other meaningful segments  e.g.  paragraphs corresponding to product features  available in some semistructured review. formally  we denote the expert review by r = {r1 ... rk} where ri is a segment. since we can always treat a sentence as a segment  this definition is quite general.
모the text collection is a set of text documents where ordinary opinions are expressed and can be represented as c = {d1 ... d|c|} where di =  si1 ... si|di|  is a document and sij is a sentence. to support opinion integration in a general and robust manner  we do not rely on extra knowledge to segment documents to obtain opinion regions; instead  we treat each sentence as an opinion unit. since a sentence has a well-defined meaning  this assumption is reasonable. to help a user interpret any opinion sentence  in

real applications  we would link each extracted opinion sentence back to the original document to facilitate navigating into the original document and obtaining context of an opinion.
모we would like our integrated opinion summary to include both opinions in the expert review and those most representative opinions in the text collection. since the expert review is well written  we keep their original form and leverage its structure to organize the ordinary opinions extracted from text. to quantify the representativeness of an ordinary opinion sentence  we will compute a support value for each extracted ordinary opinion sentence. specifically  we would like to partition the extracted ordinary opinion sentences into groups that can be potentially aligned with all the review segments r1 ... rk. naturally  there may also be some groups with extra ordinary opinions that are not alignable with any expert opinion segment  and these opinions can be very useful to augment the expert review with additional opinions.
모furthermore  for opinions aligned to a review segment ri  we would like to further separate those that are similar to ri from those that are supplementary for ri; such separation can allow a user to digest the integrated opinions more easily. finally  if ri has multiple sentences  we can further align each ordinary opinion sentence  both  similar  and  supplementary   with a sentence in ri to increase the readability.
모this problem setup is illustrated in figure 1. we now define the problem more formally.
definition  representative opinion  ro   a representative opinion ro  is an ordinary opinion sentence extracted from the text collection with a support value. formally  we denote it by oij =  붹 sij  where 붹 뫍  1 +  is a support value indicating how many sentences this opinion sentence can represent  and sij is a sentence in document di.
모since ordinary opinions tend to be redundant and we are primarily interested in extracting representative opinions  the support can be very useful to assess the representativeness of an extracted opinion.
모let ro c  be all the possible representative opinion sentences in c. we can now define the integrated opinion summary that we would like to generate as follows.
definition  integrated opinion summary  an integrated opinion summary of r and c is a tuple  r ssim ssupp sextra  where  1  r is the given expert review;  1  are similar and supplementary representative opinion sentences  respectively  that can be aligned to r  and sisim sjsupp  
ro c  are sets of representative opinion sentences;  1  sextra   ro c  is a set of extra representative opinion sentences that cannot be aligned with r.
모note that we define  opinion  broadly as covering all the discussion about a topic in opinionate sources such as blog spaces and forums. the notion of  opinion  is quite vague; we adopt this broad definition to ensure generality of the problem set up and its solutions. in addition  any existing sentiment analysis technique could be applied as a postprocessing step. but since we only focus on the integration problem in this paper  we will not cover sentiment analysis.
1. overview of proposed approach
모the opinion integration problem as defined in the previous section is quite different from any existing problem setup for opinion extraction and summarization  and it presents some special challenges:  1  how can we extract representative opinion sentences with support information   1  how can we distinguish alignable opinions from non-alignable opinions   1  for any given expert review segment  how can we distinguish similar opinions from those that are supplementary   1  in the case when a review segment ri has multiple sentences  how can we align a representative opinion to a sentence in ri  in this section  we present our overall approach to solving all these challenges  leaving a detailed presentation to the next section.
모at a high level  our approach primarily consists of two stages and an optional third stage: in the first stage  we retrieve only the relevant opinion sentences from c using the topic description t as a query. let co be the set of all the retrieved relevant opinion sentences. in the second stage  we use probabilistic topic models to cluster sentences in co and obtain ssim  ssupp and sextra. when ri has multiple sentences  we have a third stage  in which we again use information retrieval techniques to align any extracted representative opinion to a sentence of ri. we now describe each of the three stages in detail.
모the purpose of the first stage is to filter out irrelevant sentences and opinions in our collection. this can be done by using the topic description as a keyword query to retrieve relevant opinion sentences. in general  we may use any retrieval method. in this paper  we used a standard language modeling approach  i.e.  the kl-divergence retrieval model  . to ensure coverage of opinions  we perform pseudo feedback using some top-ranked sentences; the idea is to expand the original topic description query with additional words related to the topic so that we can further retrieve opinion sentences that do not necessarily match the original topic description t. after this retrieval stage  we obtain a set of relevant opinion sentences co.
모in the second stage  our main idea is to exploit a probabilistic topic model  i.e.  probabilistic latent semantic analysis  plsa  with conjugate prior  1  1  to cluster opinion sentences in a special way so that there will be precisely one cluster corresponding to each segment ri in the expert review. these clusters are to collect opinion sentences that can be aligned with a review segment. there will also be some clusters that are not aligned with any review segments  and they are designed to collect extra opinions. thus the model provides an elegant way to simultaneously partition opinions and align them to the expert review. interestingly  the same model can also be adapted to further partition opinions aligned to a review segment into similar and supplementary opinions. finally  a simplified version of the model  i.e.  no prior  basic plsa  can be used to cluster any group of sentences to extract representative opinion sentences. the support of a representative opinion is defined as the size of the cluster represented by the opinion sentences.
모note that what we need in this second stage is semisupervised clustering in the sense that we would like to constrain many of the clusters so that they would correspond to the segments ris in the expert review. thus a direct application of any regular clustering algorithm would not be able to solve our problem. instead of doing clustering  we can also imagine using each expert review segment ri as a query to retrieve similar sentences. however  it would be unclear how to choose a good cutoff point on the ranked list of retrieved results. compared with these alternative approaches  plsa with conjugate prior provides a more principled and unified way to tackle all the challenges.
모in the optional third stage  we have a review segment ri with multiple sentences and we would like to align all extracted representative opinions to the sentences in ri. this can be achieved by using each representative opinion as a query and retrieve sentences in ri. once again  in general  any retrieval method can be used. in this paper  we again used the kl-divergence retrieval method.
모from the discussion above  it is clear that we leverage both information retrieval techniques and text mining techniques  i.e.  plsa   and our main technical contributions lie in the second stage where we repeatedly exploit semi-supervised topic modeling to extract and integrate opinions. we describe this step in more detail in the next section.
1. semi-supervised plsa for opinion integration
모probabilistic latent semantic analysis  plsa   and its extensions  1  1  1  have recently been applied to many text mining problems with promising results. our work adds to this line yet another novel use of such models for opinion integration.
모as in most topic models  our general idea is to use a unigram language model  i.e.  a multinomial word distribution  to model a topic. for example  a distribution that assigns high probabilities to words such as iphone   battery   life  
 hour   would suggest a topic such as battery life of iphone.  in order to identify multiple topics in text  we would fit a mixture model involving multiple multinomial distributions to our text data and try to figure out how to set the parameters of the multiple word distributions so that we can maximize the likelihood of the text data. intuitively  if two words tend to co-occur with each other and one word is assigned a high probability  then the other word generally should also be assigned a high probability to maximize the data likelihood. thus this kind of model generally captures the co-occurrences of words and can help cluster the words based on co-occurrences.
모in order to apply this kind of model to our integration problem  we assume that each review segment corresponds to a unigram language model which would capture all opinions that can be aligned with a review segment. furthermore  we introduce a certain number of unigram language models to capture the extra opinions. we then fit the mixture model to co  i.e.  the set of all the relevant opinion sentences generated using information retrieval as described in the previous section. once the parameters are estimated  they can be used to group sentences into different aspects corresponding to the different review segments and extra aspects corresponding to extra opinions. we now present our mixture model in detail.
1 basic plsa
모we first present the basic plsa model as described in . intuitively  the words in our text collection co can be classified into two categories  1  background words that are of relatively high frequency in the whole collection. for example  in the collection of topic  iphone   words like  iphone    apple  are considered as background words.  1  words related to different aspects which we are interested in. so we define k+1 unigram language models: 붿b as the background model to capture the background words  붣 = {붿1 붿1 ... 붿k} as k theme models  each capturing one aspect of the topic and corresponding to the k review segments r1 ... rk. a document d in co  in our problem it is actually a sentence  can then be regarded as a sample of the following mixture model.

모where w is a word  뷇d j is a document-specific mixing weight for the j-th aspect     and 뷂b is the
mixing weight of the background model 붿b. the log-likelihood of the collection co is
p p
	logp co|붦  =	d뫍co	w뫍v {c w d 뫄
	pk	 1 
	log 뷂bp w|붿b  +  1   뷂b 	j=1 뷇d jp w|붿j  }
모where v is the set of all the words  i.e.  vocabulary   c w d  is the count of word w in document d  and 붦 is the set of all model parameters. the purpose of using a background model is to  force  clustering to be done based on more discriminative words  leading to more informative and more discriminative theme models.
모the model can be estimated using any estimator. for example  the expectation-maximization  em  algorithm  can be used to compute a maximum likelihood estimate with the following updating formulas:

figure 1: generation process of a word

1 semi-supervised plsa
모we could have directly applied the basic plsa to extract topics from co. however  the extracted topics in this way would generally not be well-aligned to the expert review. in order to ensure alignment  we would like to  force  some of the multinomial distribution component models  i.e.  language models  to be  aligned  with all the segments in the expert review. in probabilistic models  this can be achieved by extending the basic plsa to incorporate a conjugate prior defined based on the expert review segments and using the maximum a posterior  map  esatimator instead of the maximum likelihood estimator as we did in the basic plsa. intuitively  a prior defined based on an expert review segment would tend to make the corresponding language model similar to the empirical word distribution in the review segment  thus the language model would tend to attract opinion sentences in co that are similar to the expert review segment. this ensures the alignment of the extracted opinions with the original review segment.
모specifically  we build a unigram language model {p w|rj }w뫍v for each review segment rj  j 뫍 {1 ... k}  and define a conjugate prior  i.e.  a dirichlet prior  on each multinomial distribution topic model  parameterized as dir {횱p w|rj }w 뫍 v    where 횱 is a confidence parameter for the prior. since we use a conjugate prior  횱 can be interpreted as the equivalent sample size which means that the effect of adding the prior would be equivalent to adding 횱p w|rj pseudo counts for word w when we estimate the topic model p w|붿j . figure 1 illustrates the generation process of a word w in such a semi-supervised plsa where the prior serves as some training data  to bias the clustering results.
the prior for all the parameters is given by
ky+m y
	p 붦  뫚	p w|붿j 횱p w|rj 	 1 
j=1 w뫍v
모generally we have m   1  because we may want to find extra opinion topics other than the corresponding segments in the expert review. so we set 횱 = 1 for k   j 뫞 k + m.
모with the prior defined above  we can then use the maximum a posterior  map  estimator to estimate all the parameters as follows
	붦 = 	argmaxp co|붦 p 붦 	 1 
붦
모the map estimate can be computed using essentially the same em algorithm as presented above with only slightly different updating formula for the component language models. the new updating formula is:

모we can see that the main difference between this equation and the previous one for basic plsa is that we now pool the counts of terms in the expert review segment with those from the opinion sentences in co  which is essentially to allow the expert review to serve as some training data for the corresponding opinion topic. this is why we call this model semi-supervised plsa.
모if we are highly confident of the aspects captured in the prior  we could empirically set a large 횱. otherwise  if we need to ensure the impact of the prior without being over restricted by the prior  some regularized estimation techniques are necessary. following the similar idea of regularized estimation   we define a decay parameter 붾 and a prior weight 뷃j as
		 1 
모so we could start from a large 횱  say 1   i.e.  starting with perfectly alignable opinion models  and gradually decay it in each em iteration by equation 1  and we stop the decaying of 횱 until the weight of the prior 뷃j is below some threshold 붻  say 1 . decaying allows the model to gradually pick up words from co. the new updating formulas
are
 if 뷃j   붻
		 1 
		if 뷃j 뫞 붻

1 overall process
모in this section  we describe how we use the semi-supervised topic model to achieve three tasks in the second stage as defined in section 1. we also summarize the computational complexity of the whole process.
1.1 theme extraction from text collection
모we start from a topic t  a review r = {r1 ... rk} of k segments  a collection co = {d1 d1 ... dn} of opinion sentences closely relevant to t. we assume that co covers a number of themes each about one aspect of the topic t. we further assume that there are k + m major themes in the collection  {붿1 붿1 ... 붿k+m}  each being characterized by a multinomial distribution over all the words in our vocabulary v  also known as a unigram language model or a topic model .
모we propose to use review aspects as priors in the partition of co into aspects. we could have used the whole expert review segment to construct the priors. but if so  we could only get the opinions that are most similar to the review opinions. however  we would like extract not only opinions supporting the review opinions but also supplementary opinions on the review aspect. so we use only the aspect words  to estimate the prior. we use a simple heuristic: opinions are usually expressed in the form of adjectives  adverbs and verbs while aspect words are usually nouns. and we apply a part-of-speech tagger1 on each review segment ri and further filter out the opinion words to get a ri1. the prior {p w|ri1 }w뫍v is estimated by maximum likelihood:
		 1 
given these priors constructed from the expert review
{p w|ri1 }w뫍v   i 뫍 {1 ... k}  we could estimate the parameters for the semi-supervised topic model according to section 1. after that  we have a set of theme models extracted from the text collection {붿i|i = 1 ... k + m}  and we could group each sentence di in co into one of the k + m themes by choosing the theme model with the largest probability of generating di:
x
	argmaxp di|붿j  = argmax	c w di p w|붿j 	 1 
j	j w뫍v
모if we define g di  = j if di is grouped into {p w|붿j }w뫍v   then we have a partition of co:
               co = {si|i = 1 ... k + m}  1  where each si is a set of sentences si = {dj|g dj  = i dj 뫍 co} with the following two properties:
k +m
	co =	si	 1 
i=1
	si 뫌 sj =  	 i j 뫍 {1 ... k + m}  i 1= j	 1 
모thus each si  i = 1 ... k  corresponds to the review aspect ri and each sj  j = k + 1 ... k + m  is the set of sentences that supplements the expert review with additional aspects. parameter m  the number of additional aspects  is set empirically.
1.1 further separation of opinions
모in this subsection  we show that how we further partition each si  i = 1 ... k into two parts:
	si = {sisim  sisupp}	 1 
모such that sisim contains sentences that is similar to the opinions in the review while sisupp is a set of sentences that supplement the review opinions on the review aspect ri.
모we assume that each subset of sentences si  i = 1 ... k  covers two themes captured by two subtopic models {p w|붿isim }w뫍v and {p w|붿isupp }w뫍v . we first construct a unigram language model {p w|ri }w뫍v from review segment ri using both the feature words and opinion words. this model is used as a prior for extracting {p w|붿isim }w뫍v . after that  we estimate the model parameters as described in section 1. and then  we could classify each sentence dj 뫍 si into either sisim or sisupp in the way similar to equation 1.
1.1 generation of summaries
so far  we have a meaningful partition over co:
co = {s1sim ... sksim}뫋{s1supp ... sksupp}뫋{sk+1 ... sk+m}
 1 
모now we need to further summarize each block p in the partition 
... sk+m} by extracting representative opinions ro p . we take a two-step approach.
모in the first step  we try to remove the redundancy of sentences in p and group the similar opinions together by unsupervised topic modeling. in detail  we use plsa  without any prior  to do the clustering and set the number of clusters proportional to the size of p. after the clustering  we get a further partition of p = {p1 ... pl} where l = |p|/c and c is a constant parameter that defines the average number of sentences in each cluster. one representative sentence in pi is selected by the similarity between the sentence and the cluster centroid  i.e. a word distribution  of pi. if we define rsi as the representative sentenced of pi  and 붹i = |pi| as the support  we have a representative opinion of pi which is oi =  붹i rsi . thus ro p  = {o1 o1 ... ol}.
모in the second step  we aim at providing some context information for each representative opinion oi of p to help the user to better understand the opinion expressed. what we propose is to compare the similarity between opinion sentence rsi and each review sentence in segment corresponding to p and assign rsi to the review sentence with the highest similarity. for both steps  we use kl-divergence as the similarity measure.
1.1 computational complexity
모plsa and semi-supervised plsa have the same complexity: o i 몫k |v |+|w|+|c|    where i is the number of em iterations  k is the number of themes  |v | is the vocabulary size  |w| is the total number of words in the collection  |c| is the number of documents. our whole process makes multiple invocations of plsa/semi-supervised plsa  and we suppose we use the same i across different invocations.
모 theme extraction from text collection makes one invocation of semi-supervised plsa on the whole collection co  where the number of cluster is k + m. so the complexity is o i 몫  k + m  몫  |v | + |w| + |co|  = o i 몫  k + m  몫 |w| .
모there are k invocations of semi-supervised plsa in further separation of opinions   each on a subset of the collection si i = 1 ... k  with only two clusters. and we know from equation 1 that . suppose
wsi is the total number of words inp si. so the total complexity is o  si i몫1몫 |v |+|wsi|+|si|   which in the worst case is o i 몫 1 몫  k|v | + |w| + |co|   = o i 몫  k|v | + |w|  .
모finally   generation of summaries  makes 1k + m invocations of plsa  each on a subset of the collection p 뫍
{s1sim ... sksim}뫋{s1supp ... sksupp}뫋{sk+1 ... sk+m} = co. in each invocation  the number of clusters is   and wp is the total number of words in p. so the total complexity in this stage is   which in
the worst case is
.
모thus  our whole process is bounded by the computational complexity o i 몫   k + m + 1 |w| + k|v | + |co|몫|c w|  . since k  m  and c are usually much smaller than |co|  the running time is basically bounded by o i 몫 |co| 몫 |w| .
1. experimental results
모in this section  we first introduce the data sets used in the experiment. then we demonstrate the effectiveness of our semi-supervised topic modeling approach by showing two examples in two different scenarios. finally  we also provide some quantitative evaluation.
1 data sets
topic desc.source# of words# of aspectsiphonecnet1barack obamawikipedia1table 1: basic statistics of the review data set
topic desc.query terms# of articlesniphoneiphone1barack obamabarack+obama1table 1: basic statistics of the blog data set
모we need two types of data sets for evaluation. one type is expert reviews. we construct this data set by leveraging the existing services provided by cnet and wikipedia  i.e.  we submit queries to their web sites and download the expert reviews on  iphone  written by cnet editors1 and the introduction part of articles about  barack obama  in wikipedia1. the composition and basic statistics of this data set  denoted as  review   is shown in table 1.
모the other type of data is a set of opinion sentences related to certain topic. in this paper  we only use weblog data  but our method can be applied on any kind of data that contain opinions in free text. specifically  we firstly submit topic description queries to google blog search1 and collect the blog entries returned. the search domain are restricted to spaces.live.com  since schema matching is not our focus. we further build a collection of n opinion sentences co = {d1 d1 ... dn} which are highly relevant to the given topic t using information retrieval techniques as described as the first stage in section 1. the basic information of these collections  denoted as blog is shown in table 1. for all the data collections  porter stemmer  is used to stem the text and stop words in general english are removed.
1 scenario i: product
모gathering opinions on products is the main focus of the research on opinion mining  so our first example of opinion integration is a hot product  iphone. there are 1 defined segments in the  iphone  review of the review data set. we use these 1 segments as aspects from the review and define 1 extra aspects in the semi-supervised topic model.
모due to the limitation of the spaces  only part of the integration with review aspects are show in table 1. we can see that there is indeed some interesting information discovered.
  in the  background  aspect  which corresponds to the background introduction part of the expert review   we see that lots of people care about the price of iphone  and the sentences extracted from blog articles show different pricing information which confirms the fact that the price of iphone has been adjusted. in fact  the first two sentences only mention the original price while the third sentence talks about the cut down of the price but the actual numbers are incorrect.
  the displayed sentence in the  activation  aspect describes the results if you do not activate the iphone. a piece of very interesting information related to this aspect   unlocking the iphone  is never mentioned in the expert review but is extracted from blog articles by using our semi-supervised topic modeling approach. indeed  we know that unlock or hack is a hot topic since the iphone hit the market. this is a good demonstration that our approach is able to discover information which is highly related and supplementary to the review.
  the last aspect shown is about battery life. there is a high support  support = 1 in the column of similar opinions  of the life of battery described in the review  and there is another supplementary set of sentences  support = 1  which gives a concrete number of battery in hours under real usage of iphone.

figure 1: support statistics for iphone aspects
모furthermore  we may also want to know which aspects of iphone people are most interested in. if we define the support of an aspect as the sum of the support of representative opinions in this aspect  we could easily get the support statistics for each review aspects in our topic modeling approach. as can be seen in figure 1  the  background  aspect attracts the most discussion. this is mainly caused by the mention of the price of iphone in the background aspect. the next two aspects with highest support are  bluetooth and wireless and activation both with support 1. as stated in the iphone review  the wi-fi compatibility is especially welcome  and a feature that's absent on far too many smart phones.   and our support statistics suggest that people do comment a lot about this unique feature of iphone.  activation  is another hot aspect as discovered by our method. as many people know  the activation of iphone requires a two-year contract with at&t  which brings much controversy among customers.
모in addition  we show three of the most supported representative opinions in the extra aspects in table 1. the first sentence points out another way of activating iphone  while the second sentence brings up the information that cisco was the original owner of the trademark iphone . the third sentence expresses a opinion in favor of another smartphone  nokia n1  which could be useful information for a potential smartphone buyer who did not know about nokia n1 before.
1 scenario ii: political figure
모if we want to know more about a political figure  we could treat a short biography of the person as an expert review and apply our semi-supervised topic model. in this subsection  we demonstrate what we can achieve by an example of  barack obama . there is no definition of segments in the short introduction part in wikipedia  so we just treat each sentence as a segment.
모in table 1  we display part of the opinion integration with the 1 aspects in the review. since there is no short description of each aspect in this example  we use id in the first column of the table to distinguish one aspect from another.
  aspect 1 is a brief introduction of the person and his position  which attracts many sentences in the blog articles some directly confirming the information provided in the review  some also suggest his position while stating other facts.
  aspect 1 and 1 talk about his heritage and early life  and we further discover from the blog articles supplementary information such as his birthplace is honolulu  his parents' names are barack hussein obama sr. and ann dunham  and even why his father came to the us.
  for aspect 1 about his presidential candidacy  our summaries not only confirm the fact but also point out another democratic presidential candidate hillary clinton.
  a brief description of his family is in review aspect 1  and the mention of his daughters has attracted a piece of news related to young daughters of white house aspirants.
모after further summing up the support for each aspect  we display two of the most supported aspects and one least supported aspect in table 1. the most supported aspect is aspect 1 with support = 1  which as mentioned above is a brief introduction of the person and his position. aspect 1 talking about his heritage ranks as the second with support = 1  which agrees with the fact that he is special among the presidential candidates because of his kenyan

barack hussein obama  born august 1  1 1is the junior united states senator from illinois and a member of the democratic party.1born to a kenyan father and an american1mother  obama grew up in culturally diverse surroundings.1he married in 1 and has two daughters.1	aspect	review	similar opinions	supplementary opinions
 support=1 the iphone will come in two versions  a
1gb 1 model  and an 1gb 1 model with a twobackgroundeven with the new $1 price for the 1gb model  down from anyear contract. support=1 the price: 1  1gb  or 1gb  withoriginal price of $1   it's stilla two year contract   by the time the contract is overa lot to ask for a phone that lacksyour iphone will probably be scratched all over like theso many features and locks younano or be made obsolete by better phone on theinto an iphone-specific two-year contract with at&t.market. support=1 recently  apple decided to cut down price of iphone from 1 to 1   giving rise to much rage from consumers bought the phone before. support=1 several other methods for unlocking theyou can make emergency calls  butiphone have emerged on the internet in the past fewactivationyou can't use any other functions weeks  although they involve tinkering with the iphoneincluding the ipod music player.hardware or more complicated ways of bypassing the protections for at t's exclusivity.battery life the apple iphone support=1  iphone will feature up support=1 playing relatively high bitrate vga h.1has a rated battery life of 1 hoursto 1 hours of talk time  1 hours ofvideos  our iphone lasted almost exactly 1 freakingbatterytalk time  1 hours of musicinternet use  1 hours of videohours of continuous playback with cell and wifi onplayback  1 hours of video playback playback or 1 hours of audio but bluetooth off .and 1 hours on internet use.playbacktable 1: iphone example: opinion integration with review aspects
supplementry opinions on extra aspects
 support=1 you may have heard of iasign  http: iphone.fiveforty.net wiki index.php iasign   an iphone dev wiki tool that allows you to activate your phone without going through the itunes rigamarole. support=1 cisco has owned the trademark on the name  iphone  since 1  when it acquired infogear technology corp.  which originally registered the name. support=1 with the imminent availability of apple's uber cool iphone  a look at 1 things current smartphones like the nokia n1 have been able to do for a while and that the iphone can't currently match...table 1: iphone example: opinion integration on extra aspectstable 1: obama example: support of aspects
origin and indicates that people are interested in it. the least covered aspect is aspect 1 about his family  since the total support is only 1.
1 quantitative evaluation
모in order to quantitatively evaluate the effectiveness of our semi-supervised topic modeling approach  we designed a test which consists of three tasks  each asks a user to perform a part of our processing. the main goal is to see to what extent can our approach reproduce the human choice. the test is designed based on the above-mentioned  barack obama  example. in order to reduce the bias  we collect the evaluation results from three users  who are all phd students in our department  two males and one female.
모in the first designed task  we aims at evaluating the effectiveness of our approach in identifying the extra aspects in addition to review aspects. towards this goal  we generate a big set of sentences sall by mixing all the sentences in with seven most supported sentences in {sk+1 ... sk+m}. there are |sall| = 1 sentences in sall in total. the users are asked to select seven sentences from randomly permutated sall that do not fit into the k review aspects. in this way  we could see how is the human consensus on this task and how our approach could recover the choice of human.
usersentence id of the 1 sentencesour approach1  1  1  1  1  1  1user 1  1  1  1  1  1  1user 1  1  1  1  1  1  1user 1  1  1  1  1  1  1table 1: selection of 1 sentences on extra aspects
모table 1 displays the selection of the seven sentences on extra aspects by our method and the three users. the only sentence out of seven that all three users agree on is sentence number 1  which suggests that grouping sentences into extra aspects is quite a subjective task so it is difficult to produce results satisfactory to each individual user. however our method is able to recover 1% of the user's choices on average.
   in the second task  we try to evaluate the performance of our approach in grouping sentences into k review aspects. we randomly permutate all the sentences in  to construct a sreview and remove the aspect assigned to each sentence. for each of the 1 sentences  the users are asked to assign one of the 1 review aspects to it. in essence  this is a multi-class classification problem where the number of classes is 1.
the results turn out to be
  three users agree on 1 sentences about the class label  which means that more than half of the sentences are controversial even among human users.
  on average  our method could recover the user's choices by 1 sentences out of 1. note that if we randomly
id	review	similar opinions	supplementary opinions
barack hussein obama  born august support=1 senator barack hussein support=1 barack obama  another leading democratic presidential hopeful  campaigns for more dollars with  dinner with barack.  support=1 a chicago  illinois  radio station1  1  is the junior united statesobama is the junior united statesrecently conducted a live survey on a mansenator from illinois and a member of the democratic party.senator from illinois and a member of the democratic party .called barack obama. support=1 in fact  there is not a single metropolitan area in the country where a family earning minimum wage can afford decent housing  said senator barack obama.the u.s. senate historical office lists him as the fifth african american support=1 barack obama is an african1senator in u.s. history and the onlyamerican whose father was born in kenyaafrican american currently serving in the u.s. senate.and got a sholarship to study in american.he lived for most of his childhood in the majority-minority u.s. state of support=1 obama was born in honolulu 1hawaii and spent four of his pre-teenhawaii  to barack hussein obama sr.  ayears in the multi-ethnic indonesian capital city of jakarta.kenyan  and kansas born ann dunham. support=1  ap  democratic presidential1he is among the democratic party's support=1 mr obama will contest thecandidate barack obama said sunday thatleading candidates for nomination in thedemocrat presidential nominationthe front runner for his party's nomination 1 u.s. presidential election.hillary rodham clinton  does not offer the break from politics as usual that voters need. support=1 march 1 senator barack obama is threatening legal action against a self describ-ed pedophile who has posted photos of the1he married in 1 and has twodemocratic politician's young daughters on adaughters.web site that purports to handicap the 1 presidential campaign by evaluating the  cuteness  of underage daughters and granddaughters of white house aspirantstable 1: obama example: opinion integration with review aspectsassign one aspect out of 1   1  the probability of recovering k sentences out of 1 is

where. when k = 1  the probability is only around 1;  1  the expected number of sentences recovered would be

  our method and all three users assigned the same label to 1 sentences.
  among the many mistakes our method made  three users only agree on 1 sentences. in other words  they assigned the same label to the 1 sentences which is different the label assigned by our method.
모again  this task is subjective  and there is still much controversy among human users. but our approach performs reasonably : in the 1 sentences with human consensus  our method achieves the accuracy of 1%.
모in the third task  our goal is to see how well we can separate similar opinions from supplementary opinions in the semi-supervised topic modeling approach. we first select 1 review aspects out of 1 which our method has identified both similar and supplementary opinions; then for each of the 1 aspects  we mix one similar opinion with several supplementary opinions; the users are supposed to select one sentence which share the most similar opinion with the review aspect. on average  our method could recover 1% of the choices of human users. among the different choices between our method and the users  only one aspect has achieved consensus of three users. that is to say  this is a true mistake of our method  while other mistakes do not have agreement in the users.
1. related work
모to the best of our knowledge  no previous study has addressed the problem of integrating a well-written expert review with opinions scattering in text documents. but there are some related studies which we will briefly review in this section.
모recently there has been a lot of work in opinion mining and summarization especially on customer reviews. in   sentiment classifiers are built from some training corpus. some papers  1  1  1  1  further mine product features from reviews on which the reviewers have expressed their opinions. zhuang and others focused on movie review mining and summarization .  presented a prototype system  named pulse  for mining topics and sentiment orientation jointly from customer feedback. however  these techniques are limited to the domain of products/movies  and many are highly dependent on the training data set  so are not generally applicable to summarize opinions about an arbitrary topic. our problem setup aims at shallower but more robust integration.
모weblogs mining has attracted many new research work. some focus on sentiment analysis. mishne and others used the temporal pattern of sentiments to predict the book sales  1  1 . opinmind summarizes the weblog search results with positive and negative categories. on the other hand  researchers also extract the subtopics in weblog collections  and track their distribution over time and locations . last year  mei and others proposed a mixture model to model both facets and opinions at the same time . these previous work aims at generating sentiment summary for a topic purely based on the blog articles. we aim at aligning blog opinions to an expert review. we also take a broader definition of opinions to accommodate the integration of opinions for an arbitrary topic.
모topic model has been widely and successfully applied to blog articles and other text collections to mine topic patterns  1  1  1  1 . our work adds to this line yet another novel use of such models for opinion integration. furthermore  we explore a novel way of defining prior.
1. conclusions
모in this paper  we formally defined a novel problem of opinion integration which aims at integrating opinions expressed in a well-written expert review with those in various web 1 sources such as weblogs to generated an aligned integrated opinion summary. we proposed a new opinion integration method based on semi-supervised probabilistic topic modeling. with this model  we could automatically generate an integrated opinion summary that consists of  1  supporting opinions with respect to different aspects in the expert review;  1  opinions supplementary to those in the expert review but on the same aspect; and  1  opinions on extra aspects which are not even mentioned in the expert review. we evaluate our model on integrating opinions about two quite different topics  a product and a political figure  and the results show that our method works well for both topics. we are also planning to evaluate our method more rigorously. since integrating and digesting opinions from multiple sources are critical in many tasks  our method can be applied to develop many interesting applications in multiple domains. a natural future research direction would be to address the more general setup of the problem - integrating opinions in arbitrary text collections with a set of expert reviews instead of a single expert review.
1. acknowledgments
모this work was in part supported by the national science foundation under award numbers 1  1  and 1. we thank the anonymous reviewers for their useful comments.
