the web is increasingly understood as a global information space consisting not just of linked documents  but also of linked data. more than just a vision  the resulting web of data has been brought into being by the maturing of the semantic web technology stack  and by the publication of an increasing number of datasets according to the principles of linked data.  
the linked data on the web  ldow1  workshop brings together researchers and practitioners working on all aspects of linked data. the workshop  provides a forum to present the state of the art in the field and to discuss ongoing and future research challenges. in this workshop summary we will outline the technical context in which linked data is situated  describe developments in the past year through initiatives such as the linking open data community project  and look ahead to the workshop itself. 
categories and subject descriptors 
h.1.  information storage and retrieval : online information services - data sharing. h.1.  information storage and retrieval : online information services - web-based services. general terms: experimentation  languages  standardization  verification.  
keywords: linked data  semantic web  web of data  rdf 
1. the web of data 
linked data is about employing the resource description framework  rdf  and the hypertext transfer protocol  http  to publish structured data on the web and to connect data between different data sources  effectively allowing data in one data source to be linked to data in another data source.  
the principles of linked data were first outlined by berners-lee in 1   and provide broad guidance upon which data publishers have begun to realize the web of data. this guidance has been extended by technical documents such as  that capture best practices emerging from the linked data community and provide recipes on which publishing systems can be based.  
the web of data can be accessed using linked data browsers  just as the traditional web of documents is accessed using html browsers. however  instead of following links between html pages  linked data browsers enable users to navigate between different data sources by following rdf links. this allows the user to start with one data source and then move through a potentially endless web of data sources connected by rdf links.  just as the traditional document web can be crawled by following hypertext links  the web of data can be crawled by following rdf links. working on the crawled data  search engines can provide sophisticated query capabilities  similar to those provided by conventional relational databases. because the query results themselves are structured data  not just links to html pages  they can be immediately processed  thus enabling a new class of applications based on the web of data. 
the glue that holds together the traditional document web is the hypertext links between html pages. the glue of the data web is rdf links. an rdf link simply states that one piece of data has some kind of relationship to another piece of data. these relationships can have different types. for instance  an rdf link that connects data about people can state that two people know each other; an rdf link that connects information about a person with information about publications in a bibliographic database might state that a person is the author of a specific paper. 
1. the linking open data project 
evidence of the emergence of a web of data comes from the linking open data project1  a grassroots community effort founded in february 1 and supported by the w1c semantic web education and outreach working group1. the aim of the project is to identify datasets that are available under open licenses  re-publish these in rdf on the web and interlink them with each other. 
during 1  the size of the web of data that directly stems from this community effort has grown to over two billion rdf triples  originating from data sets in diverse domains such as geographic information  census information  people  companies  online communities  human languages  scientific publications  films  music  books and reviews1. these data sets are interlinked by around three million rdf links. 
an indication of the range and scale of the linking open data  cloud  is provided in figure 1. as this diagram shows  key interlinking hubs are sites such as dbpedia1 and geonames1. dbpedia extracts rdf triples from the  infoboxes  commonly seen on the right hand side of wikipedia articles  and makes these available on the web in rdf to be crawled or queried with sparql. geonames in turn provides rdf descriptions of millions of geographical locations worldwide. dbpedia and geo- 

 
copyright is held by the author/owner s . 
www 1   april 1  1  beijing  china. 
acm 1-1-1/1. 1  http://richard.cyganiak.de/1/lod/  
1  http://dbpedia.org/about 
1
 http://www.geonames.org/ 1
www 1 / workshop summary 	april 1  1 ¡¤ beijing  china
 
figure 1. the linking open data  cloud   february 1 

names provide uris  and rdf descriptions  for many of the things in the world to which we want to refer. as these uris are reused within other data sets  dbpedia and geonames develop into hubs to which an increasing number of other data sets are connected  thereby increasing the potential for network effects.  
in addition to publishing and interlinking datasets  there is also ongoing work within the community project on linked data browsers  linked data crawlers  web of data search engines and other applications that consume linked data from the web. examples of linked data browsers1 are tabulator  disco  the openlink data browser and the zitgist browser. examples of web of data search engines1 and lookup indexes are falcons  sindice  swoogle and watson. these services enable humans and machines to locate and query linked data that has been published across the web. 
1. the ldow workshop 
the goal of the ldow workshop is to provide a forum for the linked data community  in which participants can present and discuss approaches to publishing linked data on the web   showcase innovative applications that consume linked data  
1
and shape the agenda and identify upcoming research issues for the next development stage of the web of data.  
the program of papers to be presented at the workshop demonstrates ongoing innovation not just in populating the web of data  but in developing applications that exploit this ecosystem for end users  and in advancing conceptual and architectural issues related to the field. in total 1 papers and demos were submitted for review  of which 1 were accepted for presentation at the workshop and inclusion in the proceedings.  
we would like to extend our sincere thanks to the ldow1 program committee for the efforts they expended in reviewing the submitted papers  and to the www1 organizers for their support of the workshop. for more information about the workshop program please refer to the workshop website: http://events.linkeddata.org/ldow1/ 
