this write-up provides a summary of the international workshop on context enabled source and service selection  integration and adaptation  csssia 1   organized in conjunction with www 1  at beijing  china on april 1nd 1. we outline the motivation for organizing the workshop  briefly describe the organizational details and program of the workshop  and summarize each of the papers accepted by the workshop. more information about the workshop can be found at http://www.cs.adelaide.edu.au/゛csssia1/.
categories and subject descriptors
h.1  information systems : online information services-web-based services; h.1  information systems : database applications
general terms
design  management
keywords
context awareness  web service  service and data integration
1. workshop goals
　context awareness refers to the capability of an application or a service being aware of its physical environment or situation  i.e.  context  and responding proactively and intelligently based on such awareness . with recent developments in computer hardware  software  networking  and sensor technologies  context awareness becomes one of the most exciting trends in computing today that holds the potential to make our daily life more productive  convenient  and enjoyable.
　service integration has the purpose of providing the final user with a single unified service  hiding the distribution and
copyright is held by the author/owner s .
www 1  april 1  1  beijing  china.
acm 1-1-1/1.
heterogeneity of the services provided by the autonomous providers. generally  service integration approaches have focused more on process modeling and execution aspects than on data integration  while the latter is often the most crucial determiner of successful integration in practice. through the use of context  a new generation of web services  i.e.  context-aware web services  is expected to arise for the benefit of coping with the dynamic nature of the internet. for instance  the best service provider in terms of quality guarantees and cost metrics would differ from time to time. a composite service provider must therefore regularly change the services invoked to provide the best service to his customers. the task of identifying the best service to invoke is the biggest challenge to overcome and necessitates techniques for detecting data and functionality changes in a service  methods for assessing the quality of the service  computing the cost of invocation etc.
　although the combination of context awareness and web service composition sounds appealing  injecting context into adaptive service integration and management raises a number of significant challenges  which have not been widely recognized or addressed by the web services community. some of them are: a  how to build a model of change: data  process and environment  b  how  when and where to track the provenance of data and meta-data  c  how to define and use effective and practical metrics to manage adaptation: how to compare ability of different services to adapt  how to compare different middleware  d  what is the role of context and how to get the right one 
　the objective of csssia 1 is to provide a forum for researchers and practitioners to exchange new ideas  developments  and experiences on the key technical challenges for deployment of context-enabled  adaptive web services and integrated applications. discussions focus on where the state of the art is and where the challenges lie  and what practices are needed to enable and sustain a bright future of this research area.
1. workshop organization
the organizing committee of csssia 1 consists of
1
www 1 / workshop summary 	april 1  1 ， beijing  chinaquan z. sheng  ullas nambiar  amit sheth  biplav srivastava  zakaria maamar  and said elnaffar. the technical program committee includes 1 internationally active researchers in this area.
　the call-for-papers  cfp  of csssia 1 has been widely circulated in the research community. there were thirteen papers submitted from twelve different countries. all the submissions were of high quality and presented many interesting aspects of web service discovery  composition and use. each paper was reviewed by at least three members of the program committee. based on the reviews and the subsequent discussions  the international program committee eventually selected six full papers and three short papers. it is our intention to select a sufficient number of papers that would cover  as wide as possible  the majority of core research domains targeted by csssia 1. the workshop proceedings is published as an acm international conference proceeding series  aicps  volume   which is available at the acm digital library.
1. workshop program
　prof. schahram dustdar from the vienna university of technology  austria gives the keynote speech titled research challenges in designing complex autonomic service-oriented systems. in his talk  prof. dustdar focuses on the increasing need for business processes and software services to attain higher degrees of autonomic  context-aware  and self-adaptive behavior due to the increasing complexity and interdependence of computing devices with the underlying information systems  as well as processes involving humans and software services. he highlights the main research challenges for this class of problems and presents the current state in building the required novel conceptual abstractions as well as needed technological implementations and validations.
　apart from the keynote speech  the program features four sessions. the first three sessions are structured to include presentations by the authors of the accepted papers  followed by a group discussion. the last session is devoted to a panel discussion of important research issues of context-aware service selection  integration  and adaptation.
　finding desired web services is crucial to the success of many web services applications. ma and zhang in efficiently finding web services using a clustering semantic approach  present a two-phase approach for efficiently detecting web services. the paper by dietze et al. titled enabling context-aware semantic web service discovery through conceptual situation spaces  proposes conceptual situation spaces  css  to capture situational contexts of web services. css are mapped to standardized semantic web service  sws  representations such as web service modelling ontology  wsmo  to enable the context-aware discovery of web services. in using context to enable semantic mediation in web service communities  mrissa et al.  address the problem of semantic heterogeneity between member web services and service communities by proposing a semantic mediation mechanism. herssens et al. introduce a service selection framework based on quality of service  qos  considerations in using qos with multi-criteria methods to lead service selection. the paper by yu et al. composite process oriented service discovery with preserving business and timed relation  addresses the service selection for composite processes by considering particular requirement context such as timed and business relations among process tasks.
　web service integration is an important technology for the effective automation of application-to-application collaborations. the paper by harney and doshi speeding up web service composition with volatile external information  reports a novel method called informed-presumptive for fast composing web services in the presence of external volatile information. segev in circular context-based semantic matching to identify web service composition  describes a work-in-progress that focuses on a new technique for identifying the composibility of two web services based on contextual similarity. han et al. in a new aggregation policy for rss services  describe an aggregation algorithm for minimizing the number of missing postings within an aggregation of rss  rich site summary  services. the paper by leung et al. toward a model of service interaction enabler in mobile environment  looks at the problem of context-based service interactions in mobile environments. it presents a device capability model for capturing the capability of a mobile device and an approach for analyzing the interaction possibility between devices.
　the papers accepted at csssia 1 cover a wide range of topics in context-aware service selection  integration  and adaptation and present some of the key directions in this research area. although many of these papers represent early results of ongoing research activities  the work reported in these papers and the research issues raised there make significant contributions in leading to broader discussions on the research and development of context-aware services and applications. we hope the set of selected papers provides the community with a better understanding of the current directions and areas to focus in future.
1. acknowledgments
　we would like to thank all the program committee members who helped us organize the workshop and for providing very useful and thoughtful feedback to the authors. we would also like to thank all the authors who submitted their papers to the workshop; they provided us with an excellent workshop program. a very special thanks to the www 1 organization committees for helping with the logistics of the workshop.
