a half-day single track workshop is designed to gather academic researchers and industrial practitioners at to share ideas and knowledge of know-how  and to discuss all relevant issues including the business models  enabling technologies  and killer applications  of web-based question answering  qa   especially  the user-interactive qa services and applications. the workshop program consists of two sessions  one for academic papers  and the other for industrial practice papers. each session consists of a leading talk  followed by three short presentations. sufficient time is allocated for brainstorming discussions in each session. 
categories and subject descriptors 
h.1  information storage and retrieval : information search and retrieval. 
general terms: algorithms  design  experimentation  human factors  languages  performance  standardization. 
keywords: question answering. 
1. objectives 
question answering  qa  is an emerging new information service following the popularization of search engines. qa can be more preferable since a direct and exact answer is expected instead of a long list of ranked  possibly relevant but usually long documents  which can be automatically returned by a search engine but still require the user's manual and sometimes very tedious filtration. after a decade of constant research efforts  we are seeing that automatic question answering  autoqa  has grown up into a new and hot sub-area of information retrieval. however  userinteractive question answering  interqa  which just emerged a couple of years ago has already witnessed its milestone of being mature and successful since 1. for example  yahoo! answers  was ranked as the best web 1 service in 1. we are anticipating a new wave of hot web information services based on interqa since it is a natural complement to search engines  or alternatively  can be considered as manual search engines.    
although autoqa has been discussed by trec  clef  sigir and ntcir as a sub-domain for many years  we'd like to dedicate a single mind event to discuss all issues of qa. therefore  we propose to start qaweb1 as the beginning of a new series of workshops  which will gather academic researchers and industrial practitioners at all level of experience to share ideas and knowledge of know-how  and to discuss all relevant issues including the business models  enabling technologies  and killer applications  of qa  especially interqa.  
we expect all participants to actively participate in the panel discussions in addition to the academic and practice paper presentations. a summary of the brainstorming panel discussion at each session will be published on the workshop website   together with all the presented papers. we wish the summaries can inspire more research output and fruitful applications. 
1. themes and topics 
all topics related to question answering  qa   especially  userinteractive qa  are of interest for the workshop. these topics include but are not limited to: system architecture  algorithms  user interfaces  business models  user models and personalized recommendation  question categorization  answer clustering  answer fusion  social networks  reputation models  text similarity  short text modeling  patterns and semantic patterns   performance evaluation  and applications.  
1. program 
the program consists for two sessions  one for academic paper presentations and the other for presentations of papers with industrial practices and experiences. each session consists of a lead talk  1 minutes  followed by three short presentations. in addition  a lead talk may use about 1 minutes to cover a brief survey of the state of the art in this area  including brief introductions  summaries  or comments of the presentations in the same session. each short presentation  1 minutes  should focus more on the method and result  and skip or just briefly mention the introduction/motivation. following all the presentations in the same session will be a small panel by all the presenters in the session for a brainstorming discussion  about 1 minutes   including answering questions from the audience. a coordinator and a scribe will be appointed for each session to facilitate the discussion and record the major points  respectively. a summary of the discussion for each session will be published on the workshop website  after the workshop. we hope such an arrangement can make the workshop to have a more interactive atmosphere.  
