applying belief revision logic to model adaptive information retrieval is appealing since it provides a rigorous theoretical foundation to model partiality and uncertainty inherent in any information retrieval  ir  processes. in particular  a retrieval context can be formalised as a belief set and the formalised context is used to disambiguate vague user queries. belief revision logic also provides a robust computational mechanism to revise an ir system's beliefs about the users' changing information needs. in addition  information flow is proposed as a text mining method to automatically acquire the initial ir contexts. the advantage of a beliefbased ir system is that its ir behaviour is more predictable and explanatory. however  computational efficiency is often a concern when the belief revision formalisms are applied to large real-life applications. this paper describes our beliefbased adaptive ir system which is underpinned by an efficient belief revision mechanism. our initial experiments show that the belief-based symbolic ir model is more effective than a classical quantitative ir model. to our best knowledge  this is the first successful empirical evaluation of a logic-based ir model based on large ir benchmark collections.
categories and subject descriptors
h.1  information search and retrieval : retrieval models-theory  algorithms  experimentation
keywords
belief revision  logic-based ir  ir context
1. introduction
1 background
¡¡the central issue of information retrieval  ir  is to estimate the degree of match between a query q and a document
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
sigir'1  july 1  1  sheffield  south yorkshire  uk.
copyright 1 acm 1-1/1 ...$1.
characterisation d. as q and d are only the partial representations of the underlying user information need n and document doc  information matching often involves uncertainty . this uncertainty can be realised based on the logical uncertainty principle  which is a generalisation of the ramsey test for ir. the logical uncertainty principle states that given any two sentences x and y  a measure of the uncertainty of x ¡ú y relative to a given data set is determined by the minimal extent to which we have to add information to the data set  to establish the truth of x ¡ú y. with a logic-based ir model  sentence x can be taken as the representation of an information seeker's needs  and sentence y is seen as the characterisation of a document . in addition  a data set is interpreted as a retrieval context which characterises a particular information matching situation . a retrieval context refers to an information seeker's background  their long term search goals  tasks at hand  knowledge about a retrieval domain  etc. it is generally believed that retrieval contexts play a crucial role in ir  1  1 .
1 justification of the proposed ir model
¡¡by way of illustration  given a retrieval context involving a science student who issues the query  java   an ir system may consider documents about  computer programming  relevant since the information seeker may be a computer science student and computer science students need to learn various programming languages. however  if the ir system is later told that its user is actually a science student specialising in  volcanology   it may recommend documents about  merapi  given the same query. the reason is that  merapi  is a famous active volcano in java and volcanologists often talk about it in the context of volcanology. such contextual knowledge can be represented by a logical implication  i.e.  a belief  such as java ¡Ä volcanology ¡ú merapi. by means of the symbolic rules  it is easier for an ir system to explain why certain documents are retrieved and why not the others. by revising the new belief  volcanology  into the ir system's knowledge base  the previous belief about the retrieval context such as  computer science  will be contracted. such a process is underpinned by the so-called belief revision function.
¡¡the above example demonstrates that a retrieval context is not simply represented by a set of terms but also the relationships among some terms  e.g.  java ¡Ä computer ¡ú programming  science ¡Ä volcanology ¡ú volcano  java ¡Ä volcano ¡ú merapi  etc. . the contextual rules such as java ¡Ä volcano ¡ú merapi can automatically be discovered by applying the information flow text mining method against a textual database  e.g.  the set of documents browsed by an information seeker recently . for a large textual database  text mining can be conducted off-line  and a consistent rule set can then be maintained in the ir system's knowledge base via the belief revision processes. the nonmonotonic reasoning power offered by the belief revision logic and the inductive power brought by the information flow text mining method are complementary to each other.
¡¡the representations of an information seeker's needs  i.e.  queries  and the underlying retrieval context should be continuously revised and refined by an ir system when more information about the particular retrieval situations is available via relevance feedback. the logical uncertainty principle lays the theoretical foundation for adaptive information retrieval in the sense that the relevance of a document such as  merapi  can be established by minimally revising the representation of a retrieval context  e.g.  expanding the belief  volcanology  and contracting the belief  computer science  . belief revision can be taken as a means of directly implementing the logical uncertainty principle for adaptive ir because of its close connection with the ramsey test . more specifically  a retrieval context is formally represented by a belief set k and the changing retrieval context is modelled by the corresponding belief revision function   where ¦Á is the logical representation of a user's relevance feedback. then  a document d can be evaluated with respect to the refined retrieval context k and the query q. such a process is underpinned by q |vk d  where |vk is the expectation inference relation .
1. related work
