a critical reality in data integration is that knowledge from different sources may often be conflicting with each other. conflict resolution can be costly and  if done without proper context  can be ineffective. in this paper  we propose a novel query-driven and feedback-based approach  ficsr1  to conflict resolution when integrating data sources. in particular  instead of relying on traditional model based definition of consistency  we introduce a ranked interpretation. this not only enables ficsr to deal with the complexity of the conflict resolution process  but also helps achieve a more direct match between the users'  subjective  interpretation of the data and the system's  objective  treatment of the available alternatives. consequently  the ranked interpretation leads to new opportunities for bi-directional  datainforms○★ user  feedback cycle for conflict resolution: given a query   a  a preliminary ranking of candidate results on data can inform the user regarding constraints critical to the query  while  b  user feedback regarding the ranks can be exploited to inform the system about user's relevant domain knowledge. to enable this feedback process  we develop data structures and algorithms for efficient off-line conflict/agreement analysis of the integrated data as well as for on-line query processing  candidate result enumeration  and validity analysis. the results are brought together and evaluated in the ficsr system.
categories and subject descriptors: h.1 heterogeneous databases ; h.1 information search and retrieval :relevance feedback
general terms: algorithms  experimentation
keywords: reasoning with misaligned data  conflicts  taxonomy  relevance feedback  query processing
1.	introduction
　integration of data from different sources starts with a matching/alignment phase. matching  which takes two data or schemas

 supported by nsf grant  archaeological data integration for the
study of long-term human and social dynamics  1  
 this work was done while the author was visiting asu 1
pronounced as  fixer .
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
sigmod'1  june 1  1  beijing  china.
copyright 1 acm 1-1-1/1 ...$1.

	 a 	 b 
figure 1: two conflicting shark taxonomies
as input and produces a mapping  or alignment  between elements  has been investigated in scientific  business  and web data integration  contexts. work on automated matching systems include  1  1  1  1 . c-owl  leverages predefined mappings between local and global ontologies to enable contextualized use.  proposes a language which allows specification of alternative semantics for mapping tables and shows that a constraint-based treatment of mappings can lead to efficient mechanisms for inferring new mappings.  proposes to use dtds and source-to-target dependencies to eliminate inconsistent data translation from one schema to the other.
　despite such advances in mapping technologies  alignments across the data sources are rarely perfect. in this paper  we focus on the problem of dealing with imperfectly aligned data and present a feedback-based inconsistency resolution and query processing  ficsr  system which assists the users in query answering when the integrated data contain conflicts.
1	dealing with misalignments and conflicts
　in many cases  conflict resolution is an ill-defined problem: there may be multiple ways to resolve conflicts and the appropriate conflict resolution strategy may be user- and query context-dependent. consider a scientist who is trying to work under multiple  conflicting assumptions or hypotheses. figure 1 shows two alternative shark taxonomies that are available to this scientist  each representing a different view of what the correct categorization of sharks should be. this scientist may want to keep both views until she has more understanding on their implications under a particular usage context. in such a case  overly-eager conflict resolution may be detrimental to the effective use of the available knowledge. this is true especially in information mashup scenarios   where the ease and speed of integration is as  if not more  important as the completeness and cleanliness.
　in this paper  instead of trying to achieve fully-consistent integration in advance of query processing  we rely on query instances to provide contexts in which conflicts should be resolved. like us  piazza  and heptox  recognize that it is unrealistic to expect an independent data source entering information exchange to agree to a global mediated schema or to perform heavyweight operations to map its schema to every other schema in the group. piazza presents a mediation language for mapping both the domain and document structures and focuses on certain answers that hold for every consistent instance. heptox  on the other hand  focuses on automated mapping rule generation  without explicitly considering conflicts. trio  represents alternatives probabilistically and relies on available lineage information for query processing with alternatives. quest presents an assertion-based data model to captures both value-based and structure-based conflicts in data  1 . in this paper  we propose a ranked interpretation of constraints  conflicts  and statements on data to enable feedback-based conflict resolution within the context of a query  to support quest.
1	interpretations of conflicting data
　traditionally  a consistent interpretation of the data with conflicts is defined as a maximal  self-consistent subset of the data  1  1 . this set is referred to as a model:
　definition 1  model-based interpretation . a model  or model-based interpretation  of a given knowledge base d is a subset d of the knowledge base    such that there exists no other consistent set d  where.
　since model-based repair requires selection of a subset of the data  restoration of consistency through a model-based interpretation may lead to loss of information. furthermore  in many cases  the user may not have enough information  domain knowledge  to select an appropriate model among all the alternatives implied by d. thus  instead of characterizing the user's interpretation as a maximally consistent portion of the data that she commits as being certain  we argue that a more flexible definition of interpretation  which captures the likelihood that a given asserted statement about the data can be considered as holding  may be more suitable.
　definition 1  ranked interpretation . let d be the data and s be a set of statements  i.e.  propositions  on the data. then  a total ranking of statements in s is a ranked interpretation of the data d.
the model-based interpretation of the data is a special case of the ranked interpretation  where the rank of all certainly true statements is better than the rank of all certainly false ones.
1	objective vs. subjective interpretations
