people often repeat web searches  both to find new information on topics they have previously explored and to re-find information they have seen in the past.  the query associated with a repeat search may differ from the initial query but can nonetheless lead to clicks on the same results.  this paper explores repeat search behavior through the analysis of a one-year web query log of 1 anonymous users and a separate controlled survey of an additional 1 volunteers.  our study demonstrates that as many as 1% of all queries are re-finding queries.  refinding appears to be an important behavior for search engines to explicitly support  and we explore how this can be done.  we demonstrate that changes to search engine results can hinder refinding  and provide a way to automatically detect repeat searches and predict repeat clicks.  
categories and subject descriptors 
h1  information storage and retrieval : search and retrieval 
general terms 
measurement  experimentation  human factors. 
keywords 
query log analysis  web search  re-finding  repeat queries. 
1. introduction 
thanks to the ubiquity of the internet search engine box  users have come to depend on web search engines both to find new information and to re-find previously viewed information.  a recent pew internet and american life report showed that internet searches are a top internet activity  second only to email ; in a study of web users   1% of those surveyed reported  not being able to return to a page i once visited   as one of  the biggest problems in using the web.   the effect of this is that knowledge workers are estimated to waste 1% of their time because they cannot find information that they know already exists .  despite these known problems  the use of keyword search engines for re-finding has not been significantly studied. 
while many searches are for new information  a significant use of search engines is to find information that was found before.  for example  a query or keyword is often used to  bookmark  a web page.  in this paper  we build on earlier work  to explore how keyword search is used for re-finding.  we analyze the queries and result clicks of 1 anonymous yahoo users over the course of a year.  our analysis demonstrates that re-finding queries are common and provides a detailed characterization of them.  given the pervasiveness of re-finding queries  we explore which search engine features support or hinder re-finding.  in particular  we concentrate on changes in rank and demonstrate the detrimental impact of rank changes on this type of task.  making use of our understanding of re-finding behavior  we describe algorithmic methods to detect re-finding intent and suggest ways in which search engines can better support this behavior.  
log studies like the one presented here are valuable because they give a large-scale  realistic picture of users' actions.  however  they give no insight into underlying motivation.  to study refinding through log analysis  it was necessary to try to glean from the data those queries which were intended to re-find information rather than find new information.  re-finding intent was approximated by looking for repeated clicks on the same search result in response to queries issued by the same user at different times.  the query used to re-find the result may or may not be the same as the query used to find it originally.  for example  if a person searched with the query  kpcc southern california public radio  and clicked on the result http://www.scpr.org  and then later clicked on the same result while searching for  spcr   the behavior was considered re-finding.  because of our limited ability to automatically distinguish re-finding from finding behavior in the query logs  our observations were supplemented with a separate additional controlled experiment of a panel of  1 volunteers where a re-finding task was explicitly defined.   
no matter how re-finding is approximated in the logs  analysis reveals it is very common.  forty percent of all observed queries led to a click on a result that was also clicked during another query session by the same user  and nearly 1% of all urls clicked in the data set were clicked by the same user more than once. as we will demonstrate  the impact of the interplay between this common behavior and changing result rankings has a cost in terms of session time.  as a way of dealing with this problem  we discuss simple but effective ways to automatically detect refinding queries and implications for search engine design.  
1. related work 
re-finding behavior has recently attracted considerable interest  1  1  1  1  1  1  1 .  many re-finding studies have been limited to small-scale laboratory or interview based studies.  such studies of re-finding have consistently found that people tend to rely on 

 
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  or republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
sigir'1  july 1  1  amsterdam  the netherlands. copyright 1 acm  1-1-1/1...$1.
meta-data about their target   for example  re-finding previously viewed content via known paths  1  1 .  thus if someone originally encountered a piece of information via a search engine  that person is likely to try to repeat the same query to find that same information again.  however  because people process encountered information to varying degrees  some refinding may rely heavily on meta-data learned during the initial encounter  while some may look very similar to searches for new information .  we observe repeat query behavior in the logs that seems to represent the entire spectrum. 
log 	analysis figure 1: distribution of length of search traces in days  average: 1 
days  median: 1 days  allows researchers to observe a greater variety of 
behavior than laboratory and observational studies  and gives a very realistic picture of people's actions  although it gives no insight into people's underlying motivation.  log analysis has shown that web site re-visitation is very common  1  1  1   with estimates of the portion of web page visits that are re-visits reaching up to 1% .  while many of these re-visitations occur shortly after the first visit  e.g.  during the same session using the back button   a significant number occur after a considerable amount of time has elapsed. the results of web site re-visitation studies have informed web browser history and back button functionality. 
while large-scale studies have been done on query logs  e.g.     surprisingly  there has been little analysis of re-visitation and re-finding.  these studies have found that most queries are issued only once or twice.  these results are particularly interesting when considered in light of our study  as we see that individuals are very likely to repeat queries.  it is likely that many of the repeat queries seen by a search engine are repeated by the same individual s .  
some log analysis studies have looked at queries clustered by topic  1  1  1 .  several studies have investigated queries in aggregate over time  to understand changes in popularity  and uniqueness of query topics at different times of day .  wedig and madani showed that topics for a user are consistent over time and different from one another  and that some users repeat clicks over long time periods .  others have analyzed queries over time for individuals  but focused on short periods of time such as query sessions  1  1 .   
sanderson and dumais  confirmed re-finding behavior observed by us in previous work  and extended that work by examining temporal properties of repeated searches and clicks over a period of 1 days.  they focused on the temporal aspects of repeat queries  finding  for example  that navigational queries are repeated over longer periods of time than non-navigational queries.  our work is unique in that it looks at combinations of query and click patterns for anonymous individuals over long time periods  one year .  because of the long time period studied we are able to characterize the different ways users express the repeat query intent and explore how they deal with result list changes. 
1. study methodology 
we analyzed search traces of queries issued to the yahoo search engine over a period of 1 days  august 1  1 to july 1  1  by 1 users.  search traces were considered for inclusion in the study if they included queries issued during at least four of the last ten days of the sample period.  the average trace was 1 days long  see figure 1 .  the study was conducted in accordance with yahoo's terms of service and privacy policy.  all traces analyzed were strictly anonymous; data was never used to match a search trace with an identity.  furthermore  results reported in this paper rely solely on aggregated statistics  and examples are purely illustrative. 
for the analysis described here  we focused primarily on the large majority of queries for which there was a click on a result page; we excluded next-page clicks  clicks on alternate query suggestions and instances where there was no click at all.  the data were not filtered to remove search spam or robot/mechanical searches.  some of the strongest repeated-search repeated-click traffic may come from robots and how those may be detected based on re-finding behavior is briefly discussed later. 
in the analysis  we were not interested in very short-term query repetitions.  short-term repeat queries were most likely a result of page refreshes or back-button clicks .  to remove short-term repeat queries from our data  we considered all instances of a query that occurred within thirty minutes of an identical query to be a single query.  the threshold was chosen because there was a clear inflection in the data between the frequency at which searches were repeated before and after this point  suggesting that the observed behavior was different. 
we looked at the following information in our analysis: the query terms issued; an anonymous key distinguishing the user; the time the query was issued; what results were clicked and when; and their position in the result list.  in total  1 queries were observed  an average of 1 per trace .  the average query length  1 words   and average number of results clicked per result page was similar to what is reported elsewhere . 
1. identifying repeat queries 
to successfully identify repeat queries in this data  it was necessary to associate queries by inferring the intent of the user  rather than relying on the exact query string being repeated.  many users repeated past query strings perfectly  e.g.   bbc world service  .  of the 1 query instances  1  or 1%  were an exact repeat of a query issued by the same anonymous user id at another time.  in contrast  only 1  or 1%  of all queries were issued by more than one user. 
often  when identical queries occurred in the same trace  the user associated with the trace clicked on the same results following the identical query issuances.  we also found a number of identical clicks that occurred following different queries  e.g.   pennsylvania lottery  and  pennsylvania powerball  .  however  even identical queries did not guarantee a repeat click; it was quite common for repeat queries to lead to unique clicks.  this section proposes a taxonomy of repeat queries  based on various combinations of query and click comparisons  and discusses their probable underlying intent.  in defining the taxonomy we are interested in both the query issued and the set of clicked results.   table 1 represents all possible classifications based on these two dimensions  query string and click-through sets .    
a number of the classes shown in table 1 are very uncommon  e.g.  queries for which there are multiple identical clicks .  in this paper  we concentrate our efforts on understanding the popular categories that are likely to include re-finding intent  bolded in table 1 .  the broader the class of query captured by the category  the more likely it is to include both re-finding intent and 
table 1. a classification of different query types. 
all queries: 1 queries  1%  overlapping click queries - 1 queries  1%  no common clicks 
1  1%  equal click queries - 1  1%   
some common clicks 
1  1%  single identical click 
1  1%  multiple identical clicks 
1    1%  equal query queries 
1  1%  navigational queries 
1  1%  1    1%  1  1%  1  1%  different query 1  1%  1  1%  1    1%  1  1%  1  1%   
other behaviors.  by adding restrictions  we reduce the number of false positives  and focus on instances with clear re-finding intent. 
repeat clicks are a reasonable proxy for re-finding intent.   thus  we are interested in the cases where users clicked on the same results during two different query instances: 
1. overlapping-click queries - queries that have some common clicks.  this type captures related intent and is the loosest form of repeated query.  it is a superset of equal-click queries.  formally  given two click-through sets  c1 and c1  corresponding to two queries  q1 and q1  c1 ” c1 』  . 
even assuming repeat clicks are a good representation for refinding intent  overlapping-click queries do not necessarily reflect re-finding exclusively.  users may explore new results as well as old in overlapping-click queries  broadening their search .  or they may not want to re-find everything they found initially  but rather to concentrate on more specific sets of results  narrowing .  the category of equal-click queries is more restrictive: 
1. equal-click queries - the user clicks on the same results for the two queries.  the queries may not be the same.  formally  for two queries  q1 and q1  and the two corresponding click-through sets c1 and c1  c1 = c1.   
while looking at click patterns is likely to give a relatively accurate picture of whether or not the user is re-finding  search engines generally do not know what their users are going to click on at the time a query is issued.  for this reason  we consider equivalence and similarity in the query strings themselves.  in the general case we can ignore the clicks associated with each query. 
1. equal-query queries - the user issues the same query but visits a potentially disjoint set of web pages.    given two queries  q1 and q1  we have q1 = q1.   
clearly  a combination of the two dimensions represents a very narrow  but precise  definition of re-finding intent:  
1. navigational queries - queries where the user makes the same query and always clicks to one and only one result are assumed to have a navigational intent.  given two queries  q1 and q1  and two corresponding click-through sets  c1 and c1  

table 1:  ways that similar query strings can differ. 
difference example exact  california secretary of state  and  california secretary of state  capitalization  air france  and  air france  extra whitespace  britney   spears  and  britney spears  word order  new york department of state  and 
 department of state new york  stop words  atlas missouri  and  atlas of missouri  non-alphanumerics  sub-urban  and  sub urban  duplicate words  wild animal  and  wild wild animal  word merge  wal mart  and  walmart  domain  hotmail.com  and  hotmail  stemming and 
pluralization  island for sale  and  islands for sale  words swaps  american embassay london  and  american consulate london  add/remove word  orange county venues  and  orange county music venues  add/remove noun 
phrase or location*  wild adventures in valdosta ga  and  wild 
adventures  abbreviations*  ba  and  british airways  synonyms*  practical jokes  and  pranks  misspellings*  yahoo  and  yhaoo  reformulations*  un secretary-general  and  kofi annan  
a navigational query is one in which q1 = q1  c1 = c1 and |c1| = |c1| =1  in practice  we find that when c1 = c1 the size of both is nearly always 1 .     
navigational queries  as defined above  tended to be for specific corporate websites  and were likely part of a daily routine or at least daily life.   by far the largest category of navigational queries contained searches for stores or businesses.  seventy-five of the 1 navigational queries  1%   contained the word  bank   presumably issued by users accessing online banking.  two other similarly sized categories of navigational queries contained the word  news   1  1%  and  mail   1  1% . 
an interesting category of re-finding queries was defined by the entry of a url  or a portion of a url  in the search box.  of the 1 unique navigational query instances  1  1%  included  .com  in the query string. these represent 1 of the 1 total navigational queries  or 1%.  although in many cases these users could have entered the url into the navigation box instead of the search box  this is a very clear example of re-finding behavior that needs to be supported by the search engine.   
currently browsers  search engine query boxes  and toolbars are designed to encourage navigational queries by supporting historybased auto-completion.  this interface feature makes it very likely that a user attempting to re-find will issue duplicate query strings.  realistically  however  not all re-finding behavior is captured by repeat queries.  for example  an additional 1% of queries  over the 1% of queries classified as navigational  contained different 

　table 1: the transformations that lead to the most frequent  normalizations in different analyses. 
different query-single 
identical click  dqsic    1 instances  different query-
overlapping click 
 dq-oc   1  controlled study  1 instances  word removal only       
 1 instances  1%  word removal only         
 1  1%  stemming only  1  
1%  capitalization only      
 1  1%  word swap only              
 1  1%  capitalization only      
 1  1%  word swap only           
 1  1%  capitalization only            
 1  1%  capitalization and word swap  1  1%  word merge only         
 1  1%  non-alphanumeric removal and word removal  1  1%  capitalization and word replacement  1  1%  non-alphanumeric removal and stop word removal        1  1%  non-alphanumerical removal and word swap  1  1%  1 other combinations at 1 instance each query strings that produced a single equivalent click  |c1| = |c1| = 1 but q1 』 q1 .  these queries are likely navigational in intent but do not fall under the navigational query category described above. 
below we consider normalization functions  functions that render two queries normalization-equivalent .  these functions allow different queries with similar intent to be identified with each other.  that is  even though q1 』 q1  n q1  = n q1 . 
1 how queries can differ 
query strings used to re-find can differ from their original forms in many ways.  it has been shown that traditional vector space measures of similarity are generally unsuitable for finding query similarity .  to understand how to identify re-finding  we explored a number of potential differences between similar queries  enumerated in table 1.  most of the differences listed are trivial to identify automatically  but some are not.  those that are starred - including abbreviations  synonyms  and reformulations - are not considered in our analysis for this reason.  
note that normalization functions must be selected carefully because many queries that look similar represent searches without any overlapping clicks and thus are likely to be searches for which there was no re-finding intent.  there is an obvious tradeoff between the precision of the queries matched and the recall. 
1 normalization in the logs 
in order to find an appropriate query normalization function we began by concentrating on those queries that represent potential re-finding intent despite the query string being different.  this class includes different query/single identical click  dq-sic  as well as the different query/overlapping click  dq-oc  categories  see table 1 .  the first category  dq-sic  is very likely to represent simple re-finding as the user travels directly to the same webpage.  the second category  dq-oc  contains more possible variation in query intent  but is interesting to explore because search engines should support complex re-finding behavior in addition to the simple single repeat click behavior.  previous work has identified over-lapping click queries as likely to be related in meaning  and therefore useful for clustering queries .   
to find the optimal normalization our system automatically tested all 1 possible combinations of the 1 top transformations from table 1 to find the minimal set of transformations that generated normalization-equivalence between each query pair.  more than one transformation was often necessary to generate equivalence. 
for dq-sic queries we were unable to find a simple mapping for 1 of the 1 unique instances  1% .  these queries tended to be very different.  for example  topically related terms with no words in common could result in the same click.  other queries required too many changes  e.g.  abbreviations  and were considered failed inputs.  of the successful transformations  1  or 1% of 1  required the removal of one word  e.g.  disney world  and  walt disney world  .  similarly  1  1%  required a word to be swapped.  generally only one transformation was necessary to generate equivalent queries  1% .  
for the unique dq-oc queries  1 of the 1 unique dq-oc instances  1%  could not be normalized.   overlapping clicks are likely related to the distinctness of the query strings  as suggested by our difficulty normalizing dc-oc queries. the more distinct two queries are  the more likely they are to generate distinct result sets.  we also find a higher incidence of word swapping  1 or 1%  and word removal  1 or 1%  in the case of dqoc than for dq-sic.  likewise  only 1 queries  1% of 1  could be normalized with only one step  a drop from the dq-sic case.   unsurprisingly  the lesson from this analysis is that queries which are exact or near repeats of previous queries are more likely to generate the exact same clicks as before.  
although such patterns observed in the logs imply re-finding intent  the intent is never explicit.  to further explore query normalization we initiated a controlled study of volunteers doing an explicit re-finding task.  the results  described below  allow us to further sharpen our understanding of re-finding and serve as a useful comparison to the log study. 
1 controlled study: how people remember  
to better understand how people remember past queries  we analyzed the data collected through a separate university-based small-scale study where volunteer participants were asked to issue a self-selected query and interact with the search results as they normally would.  after an interval of a half hour to an hour  participants were emailed a brief survey that asked them to remember the query they issued without referring back to it.  the results of this study give insight into how easy it is to remember past queries and how likely people are to remember them. 
one hundred and nineteen people participated in the study.  of those  1% demographically self-identified as male  and 1% as female.  sixty four percent reported being aged 1 to 1  1% over 1  and 1% under 1.  almost all  1%  reported using a computer daily.  in general the follow-up survey was completed within a couple of hours of the initial search.  sixty-nine percent of all survey responses were received within three hours of the initial search  and all but five were received within a day.  the average initial query length was 1 words  again  comparable to previous work .  even though the elapsed time between a participant's initial query and the moment when he or she was asked to remember it was relatively short  the original query was misremembered 1% of the time  1 of 1 query pairs . 
pricing for accura mdx  .  of the 1 	that 	were 	normalization-
equivalent  case normalization was needed in 1 cases  or 1% .  in 1 of the 1  1%   stemming of individual terms was necessary.  in a full 1%  1  one word was substituted.  for some this was due to misspellings  e.g.   helment  instead of  helmet    and for others 
it was due to the use of synonyms 	figure 	1: 	distribution 	of 	unique 
 e.g.   where might i find...  versus 	figure 1: distribution of navigational we applied the same combinatorial analysis to the data collected through this study as we did to the query logs.  of the 1 misremembered queries  1  or 1%   were found to be equivalent after some normalizations.  the nine remaining query pairs appear to have arisen from participants summarizing their previous queries instead of repeating them  e.g.   whats the best pricing available for a honda pilot or accura mdx       best queries 
 where 	can 	i 	find...  .  
interestingly  only four query pairs 
of the 1  1%  were normalized by removal of a word.  this is in contrast to the 1% in the log study  dq-sic case .  sixteen queries  or 1% of the 1  required more than one normalization step  e.g.  word order and stop word removal . 
the six most effective normalizations for our experiments are shown in table 1.  one notable difference between the two data sets is that the log contained many more instances of duplicate words and word ordering changes.  there are a number of reasons why the anonymous log and controlled volunteer studies may differ.  in particular  there was a significant difference in elapsed time between queries for the two studies.  the average time between overlapping-click queries in the logs is over 1 days  1 hours  with a median of 1 hours.  this longer interval presents many more opportunities for users to forget or change their queries.  however  in the log study users often had the opportunity to learn effective querying for frequently sought information.  many log queries were issued more than twice and likely to be more memorable as a result.  the controlled study was biased towards queries being memorable in that participants knew they were participating in a study  and against it in that the recall event was prompted by an email rather than self-directed. 
1. individual behaviors 
because navigational queries were prevalent  we explored their frequency and significance for individual users.  of the 1 users  1 issued at least one equal-query query  and 1  1%  performed at least one navigational query.  fifteen had equalquery queries but no navigational queries  possibly indicating they were explorers .  if we remove the bottom 1th percentile of users who issued the fewest queries  those issuing under 1 queries  we find that 1  1%  of 1 have issued at least one navigational query  the distribution of these is shown in figure 1 . 
of the 1 users performing navigational queries  the median user issued 1 unique navigational queries.  the average user issued 1 unique navigational queries  although removing one user  with a remarkable 1 unique navigational queries  decreases the average to 1 unique navigational queries .  considering those users who have issued navigational queries we find that on average ~1% of those users' unique queries are navigational  median of 1% .  this distribution is depicted in figure 1.   
analysis of individual behavior may lend itself to the detection of robots and search engine optimizers.  users with many regularly spaced navigational queries are possibly using an automated system. for example  one trace contained 1 navigational queries 
navigational queries  for those users issuing navigational queries . 
in 1 visits  1% ; another contained 1 navigational queries out of 1 total queries  1% . 
while it is clear from this analysis that not all users issue many re-finding queries  nearly all issue some and for many this is a significant portion of their query behavior.  
1. affect of change on re-finding 
given the prevalence of re-finding queries  it is important to understand which search engine features help and which negatively impact the user's re-finding objective.  search engines are constantly attempting to improve results through the discovery of new resources and the creation of new ranking strategies.  while this benefits users who are looking for the best new information  the rank change of previously viewed search results can adversely impact those users attempting to re-find.  since the queries in our logs occurred over a sufficient period of time for the results to change in response to repeated queries  it was possible to observe to what extent changes to search result ranking affected the users' ability to re-find information.   
we found that when a previously clicked result changed position  users were less likely to re-click results.  this suggests that changes to result ordering caused people to re-find less information and view more new information.  this is not necessarily a bad thing if the new information is better than the old. however  users frequently would like to find the same result  as evidenced by the significant number of navigational queries.  more critically  we observed that when the searcher clicked on a previously viewed result  the time it took to make the click was significantly longer if the rank of the result had changed in the meantime.  this suggests that changing the rank of a result can lead to noticeable changes in user behavior; whether or not such changes are beneficial to the user should be considered carefully. 
1 rank change reduces chance of click 
to understand how a change in a result's rank affected click behavior  we looked at how likely a result was to be clicked again.  because the dataset did not contain results that were not clicked  we were only able to identify result lists that had changed when we observed rank changes among clicked results for queries with overlapping-clicks.  a better understanding could be derived from a knowledge of which results were displayed  even if not clicked. 
changed  the second click occurred relatively quickly  while if the rank had changed  it took significantly  p 1  longer.  changes to result ordering appear to slow re-finding. 
a natural question is whether a positive rank change  a result moving up  or a negative rank change  a result moving down  impact search time differently.  because our log does not contain a significant number of rank changes of each type  it is difficult to make an argument of statistical significance.  however  the data is suggestive of a positive improvement in time-to-click for 
figure 1:  the probability of a 
	figure 1:   probability of 	positive changes in rank as well as some benefit to no we looked at all queries that had overlapping-clicks. we compared the probability that any given click would be a repeat click for these queries under two conditions:  i  when a change in rank was observed among one of the overlapping clicks and  ii  where no rank change was observed.  we found that it was much result being clicked again as a repeat click 
function of the order in which the result was clicked.   
more likely for a repeat result to be clicked if there was no change in rank: 1% percent of the clicks for overlapping-click queries were repeat clicks if there was no change in rank  while only 1% of the clicks were repeat clicks if there was a change in rank.  these estimates were obtained by averaging all consecutive pairs of overlapping-click queries. 
figure 1 shows the probability that a clicked result was a repeat click as a function of the order in which the click occurs following a repeat overlapping-click query.  the dashed curve corresponds to the probability averaged over those searches where no rank change was observed; the solid curve corresponds to an average where at least one result changed rank.  comparing the two curves  we see that a change in rank between queries makes it substantially less likely that a given result will be clicked on again during a follow-up search. 
also in figure 1 we see a sharp drop in the probability of a repeat click between the first result and the second.  given that a finite number of results were clicked initially  it seems reasonable that if the user first clicks on repeat results then the probability of a repeat click would tend to drop with increasing numbers of clicks  as the user exhausts the set of previously-clicked results.  the drop continues past click two when restricted to clicks on results with rank changes  which would seem to indicate that users are more likely to click on new results as they continue to interact with the result list than they are to click on previously clicked results which have changed rank.   
it is not immediately obvious from this analysis whether a decreased likelihood of re-finding reflects a positive or negative influence of result list changes on user experience.  it could be that the changes interfered with re-finding  or it could be that the searcher found new and better information in the new result set. 
1 rank change slows re-finding 
to get a better idea of whether changes interfered with re-finding  we looked at queries where we were certain that information was being re-found  as evidenced by a repeat click.  because easy searches are likely to take less time than harder searches  we looked at the time interval between a search and a click on a result that was seen before.  for this reason  we measured the time from when a query was issued until the common url was clicked for different-query  overlapping click queries.   
table 1 shows the average number of seconds it took to click a url that was clicked during the initial session when that url was  i  shown at the same rank it originally appeared  and  ii  shown at a different rank.  if the rank of the result had not change  likely due to learning .  when previously clicked results move down in rank  time-to-click increases.  a hypothesis consistent with previous work on eye-tracking in search  1  1  is that users pay more attention to early-ranked items.  thus  if a previously clicked on result moves up  it is more easily re-found via a visual scan.  in the future  we hope to statistically confirm these findings by using longer traces.   
1. predicting the query target 
a potentially desirable search engine behavior  given the impact of rank changes  is to impose more stability on the results returned by searches where re-finding is deemed to be the intent.  to do this  it is necessary to quickly and accurately classify queries to determine the best results for a given user given refinding intent.  this section looks at predicting whether a previously viewed result will be clicked based on the query string and past clicks. 
repeat searchers may be looking for new information  or they may want information that they have seen before.  it was most common to look for the same information: approximately 1%  1  of equal-query queries were also overlapping-click queries.  fewer queries  1 or 1%  resulted in at least one unique click.  searchers did not always want only old or only new information when they issued equal-query queries  as 1% of the queries  or 1  involved both a repeat click and a unique click.   
this section begins by looking at the effect that elapsed time and number of previous clicks have on repeat queries.  navigational queries are particularly easy to predict  and they are discussed in greater detail  as are other query types.   
1 the effect of elapsed time 
we looked at how the elapsed time between equal-query queries affected the likelihood of observing a repeat click.  the probability of a repeat click as a function of elapsed time between identical queries can be seen in figure 1.  repeat queries that were issued very close together in time  e.g.  within several hours  had a relatively low probability of resulting in a repeat click.  the probability of a repeat click for queries re-issued within an hour is table 1:  time-to-click  in seconds  as a function of rank change. 
query type mean median stddev all  rank changed & unchanged  1 1 1    rank unchanged  all types  1 1 1    rank changed  all types  1 1 1       equal-query 1 1 1       non-equal 1 1 1       non-equal-no rank change 1 1 1       non-equal -rank change 1 1 1  
1%  compared with the earlier reported overall average of 1%.  queries repeated very quickly probably occurred as part of the same search session  and represent instances where the user was looking for something new. 
the probability of repeat clicks climbs quickly  however  for intervals longer than a day or two.  once it reaches a peak  the probability of a repeat click between identical queries slowly declines.  this may represent a trend to forget previously seen information over time. 
1 navigational queries 
we found we were able to accurately predict the likelihood of a repeat click based on a history of clicked results from past queries.  navigational queries were particularly easy to predict.  recall that navigational queries are equal-query queries where the user clicked on the same result for each query instance and did not click on any other results.  using this definition  1  or 1%  of all unique equal-query queries issued were labeled navigational. 
navigational queries tended to be somewhat shorter in length than other queries  1 characters  compared with 1 characters for non-navigational equal-query queries and 1 characters for overlapping-click queries .  this seems reasonable because navigational queries are probably intended to be an easy way to return to a web page  and thus should be short and easy to remember.  navigational queries were also more likely to include an indication that they were a search for a url: 1% of all navigational queries contained  .com    .edu   or  .net   as opposed to only 1% of non-navigational equal-query queries. 
navigational queries were also repeated more often than other repeat queries  1 times  compared with 1 for equal-query queries and 1 for overlapping-click queries  and  as found by sanders and dumais   the interval between navigational queries was longer  1 days  compared with 1 days and 1 for equal-query and overlapping-click queries respectively .  it is likely that navigational queries occurred more often because they are more of an access than a search strategy  and people tend to access more than search.  the longer intervals are probably because the queries are probably chosen to be particularly memorable even across long periods of time. 
it was easy to predict whether a query was navigational given two previous instances of the same query as training data.  by doing this  we were able to automatically classify 1  or 1%  of all observed searches on the fly as navigational.  for these searches  we could predict with 1% accuracy one of the urls clicked.  when restricted to predicting the first url clicked  accuracy only dropped slightly  to 1%  and if predicting that only that url was clicked  accuracy dropped slightly more  to 1%.  
it was less easy to identify a navigational query using only one previous query.  while doing so covers more of the data  1  or 1%  of the searches   the prediction was right only 1% of the time.  given 1% of all equal-query queries involve overlapping clicks  it is not at all surprising that we can predict exactly which result will be clicked 1% of the time given we know the user only clicked one result before. 
1 other types of repeat queries 
we also investigated whether it was possible to predict whether a user was going to click on new or repeat results for equal-query queries that were not navigational.  using features suggested by the earlier analysis presented in this paper  such as elapsed time  query length  and number of results clicked previously  we trained an svm  http://www.cs.cornell.edu/people/tj/svm light/  to predict two outcomes:  i  whether or not a new result would be clicked  and  ii  whether or not a repeat result would be clicked. 
the strongest predictors for a click on a new result included the number of times the query was issued previously  and if it was issued more than once before   whether any previously viewed result was clicked more than once  and several features that were the same for queries that were repeated only twice: 
  number of clicks the first time the query was issued 
  number of clicks the previous time the query was issued 
  number of unique clicks the previous time 
while no correlation was found between the number of clicks and the likelihood of a repeat click  given the value of these features in predicting new clicks it seems it is indicative of a new click.  
the strongest predictors for a repeat click were a  that only one result was clicked during the previous search  and b  that the query had been issued more than once.  these features are also useful for identifying navigational queries  which experience a high incidence of repeat queries  although queries identified as navigational queries were excluded from this analysis . 
using the features described above  and leave-one-out crossvalidation  we compared the ability of the svm to predict whether a new result or a unique result would be clicked.  as our baseline we used the accuracy that could be expected if people were always assumed not to click on something new  1% accuracy  and to click on something they clicked before  1% accuracy .  in both cases  we found the svm was able to make a significantly  p 1  better prediction at 1% accuracy for new clicks  an increase of 1%   and 1% for repeat clicks  an increase of 1% .  the svm probably does a better job predicting new clicks than old because the navigational query data  which was the most easily identifiable repeat click data  was excluded. 
we also looked at including the user as a feature in the learning.  while this led to a slight improvement in both cases  1% accuracy in predicting new clicks and 1% accuracy in predicting repeat clicks   the difference was not significant.  however  we suspect that users do exhibit distinct repeat and new click behaviors  and we probably need to accumulate additional features that will allow us to capture this distinction. 
1. design implications 
the findings presented in this paper have many ramifications for search engine design  and potentially for browsers and search toolbars. re-finding  or searching for previously found information  represents a significant fraction of user behavior.    traditionally  search engines have focused on returning search results without consideration of the user's past query history  but the results of the log study suggest it might be a good idea for them to do otherwise.  although finding and re-finding tasks may require different strategies  tools will need to seamlessly support both activities.  as shown in the log analysis  people often clicked on both old and new results during the same search. 
because people repeat queries so frequently  search engines should assist their users by providing a means of keeping a record of individual users' search histories  perhaps via software installed on the user's own machine.  a number of search history designs have been explored  e.g.   .  the results of the log study indicate it is important to account for individual differences in how people repeat queries.  for example  different users made use of repeat queries at different rates  and may benefit from having a different amount of screen real estate devoted to displaying their search history.  furthermore  search histories could be customized based on many factors including the time of day.  users with a large number of navigational queries may also benefit from the direct linking to the webpage  possibly labeled with the frequent query term .  this form of shortcut could be highly effective for many in terms of rapid access to information. 
while a user may simultaneously have a finding and re-finding intent when searching  satisfying both needs may be in conflict.  finding new information means being returned the best new information  while re-finding means being returned the previously viewed information.  we found that when previously viewed search results changed to include new information  the searcher's ability to re-find was hampered.  it is important to consider how the two search modalities can be reconciled so a user can interact with new  and previously seen  information. as teevan  has previously proposed  before information is allowed to change  it is important to understand which aspects of it that a person has already interacted with are memorable. 
despite the personal nature of re-finding  it is possible that repeat queries from one user could benefit another.  for example  popular results for navigational queries could be globally elevated by the search engine for the benefit of everyone.  while desirable in theory  in practice this may encourage search engine spam.  in contrast  personalizing search results based on search history can help avoid potential problems caused by spam. 
1. conclusion 
in this paper  we looked at the queries issued to a leading internet search engine in 1 user search traces over the course of a year  and studied 1 users in a separate university-based controlled experiment with volunteers.  we observed that repeat searches and repeat clicks were very common.  we found it was possible to predict which queries were navigational and what results were likely to be clicked.  changing the rank of a previously clicked result appears to hinder re-finding  so click predictions should be used carefully by search engines to customize search results in a manner consistent with the user's search habits.  we are currently continuing work in this area with a larger set of users.  in particular we are interested in further analyzing repeat queries for individual users and broader notions of repetition  e.g.  repeating query chains  or co-occurrences of queries in time .  we are also pursuing an understanding of user behavior during the potentially iterative process of refining a query for re-finding tasks. 
