evolutionary clustering is an emerging research area essential to important applications such as clustering dynamic web and blog contents and clustering data streams. in evolutionary clustering  a good clustering result should fit the current data well  while simultaneously not deviate too dramatically from the recent history. to fulfill this dual purpose  a measure of temporal smoothness is integrated in the overall measure of clustering quality. in this paper  we propose two frameworks that incorporate temporal smoothness in evolutionary spectral clustering. for both frameworks  we start with intuitions gained from the well-known k-means clustering problem  and then propose and solve corresponding cost functions for the evolutionary spectral clustering problems. our solutions to the evolutionary spectral clustering problems provide more stable and consistent clustering results that are less sensitive to short-term noises while at the same time are adaptive to long-term cluster drifts. furthermore  we demonstrate that our methods provide the optimal solutions to the relaxed versions of the corresponding evolutionary k-means clustering problems. performance experiments over a number of real and synthetic data sets illustrate our evolutionary spectral clustering methods provide more robust clustering results that are not sensitive to noise and can adapt to data drifts.
categories and subject descriptors
h.1  database management : database applications- data mining; h.1  information storage and retrieval :
information search and retrieval-information filtering
general terms
algorithms  experimentation  measurement  theory

 current address for this author:
microsoft research  one microsoft way  redmond  wa 1  email: dengyong.zhou microsoft.com
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
kdd'1  august 1  1  san jose  california  usa.
copyright 1 acm 1-1-1/1 ...$1.
keywords
evolutionary spectral clustering  temporal smoothness 
preserving cluster quality  preserving cluster membership  mining data streams
1.	introduction
　in many clustering applications  the characteristics of the objects to be clustered change over time. very often  such characteristic change contains both long-term trend due to concept drift and short-term variation due to noise. for example  in the blogosphere where blog sites are to be clustered  e.g.  for community detection   the overall interests of a blogger and the blogger's friendship network may drift slowly over time and simultaneously  short-term variation may be triggered by external events. as another example  in an ubiquitous computing environment  moving objects equipped with gps sensors and wireless connections are to be clustered  e.g.  for traffic jam prediction or for animal migration analysis . the coordinate of a moving object may follow a certain route in the long-term but its estimated coordinate at a given time may vary due to limitations on bandwidth and sensor accuracy.
　these application scenarios  where the objects to be clustered evolve with time  raise new challenges to traditional clustering algorithms. on one hand  the current clusters should depend mainly on the current data features - aggregating all historic data features makes little sense in nonstationary scenarios. on the other hand  the current clusters should not deviate too dramatically from the most recent history. this is because in most dynamic applications  we do not expect data to change too quickly and as a consequence  we expect certain levels of temporal smoothness between clusters in successive timesteps. we illustrate this point by using the following example. assume we want to partition 1 blogs into 1 clusters. figure 1 shows the relationship among the 1 blogs at time t-1 and time t  where each node represents a blog and the numbers on the edges represent the similarities  e.g.  the number of links  between blogs. obviously  the blogs at time t-1 should be clustered by cut i. the clusters at time t are not so clear. both cut ii and cut iii partition the blogs equally well. however  according to the principle of temporal smoothness  cut iii should be preferred because it is more consistent with recent history  time t-1 . similar ideas have long been used in time series analysis  where moving averages are often used to smooth out short-term fluctuations. because similar short-term variances also exist in clustering applications  either due to data noises or due to non-robust behaviors

figure 1: an evolutionary clustering scenario
of clustering algorithms  e.g.  converging to different locally suboptimal modes   new clustering techniques are needed to handle evolving objects and to obtain stable and consistent clustering results.
　in this paper  we propose two evolutionary spectral clustering algorithms in which the clustering cost functions contain terms that regularize temporal smoothness. evolutionary clustering was first formulated by chakrabarti et al.  where they proposed heuristic solutions to evolutionary hierarchical clustering problems and evolutionary k-means clustering problems. in this paper  we focus on evolutionary spectral clustering algorithms under a more rigorous framework. spectral clustering algorithms have solid theory foundation  and have shown very good performances. they have been successfully applied to many areas such as document clustering  1  1   imagine segmentation  1  1   and web/blog clustering  1  1 . spectral clustering algorithms can be considered as solving certain graph partition problems  where different graph-based measures are to be optimized. based on this observation  we define the cost functions in our evolutionary spectral clustering algorithms by using the graph-based measures and derive corresponding  relaxed  optimal solutions. at the same time  it has been shown that these graph partition problems have close connections to different variation of the k-means clustering problems. through these connections  we demonstrate that our evolutionary spectral clustering algorithms provide solutions to the corresponding evolutionary k-means clustering problems as special cases.
　in summary  our main contributions in this paper can be summarized as the following:
1. we propose two frameworks for evolutionary spectralclustering in which the temporal smoothness is incorporated into the overall clustering quality. to the best of our knowledge  our frameworks are the first evolutionary versions of the spectral clustering algorithms.
1. we derive optimal solutions to the relaxed versions of the proposed evolutionary spectral clustering frameworks. because the unrelaxed versions are shown to be np-hard  our solutions provide both the practical ways of obtaining the final clusters and the upper bounds on the performance of the algorithms.
1. we also introduce extensions to our algorithms to handle the case where the number of clusters changes with time and the case where new data points are inserted and old ones are removed over time.
1	related work
　as stated in   evolutionary clustering is a fairly new topic formulated in 1. however  it has close relationships with other research areas such as clustering data streams  incremental clustering  and constrained clustering.
　in clustering data streams  large amount of data that arrive at high rate make it impractical to store all the data in memory or to scan them multiple times. under such a new data model  many researchers have investigated issues such as how to efficiently cluster massive data set by using limited memory and by one-pass scanning of data   and how to cluster evolving data streams under multiple resolutions so that a user can query any historic time period with guaranteed accuracy . clustering data stream is related to our work in that data in data streams evolve with time. however  instead of the scalability and one-pass-access issues  we focus on how to obtain clusters that evolve smoothly over time  an issue that has not been studied in the above works. incremental clustering algorithms are also related to our work. there exists a large research literature on incremental clustering algorithms  whose main task is to efficiently apply dynamic updates to the cluster centers   medoids   or hierarchical trees  when new data points arrive. however  in most of these studies  newly arrived data points have no direct relationship with existing data points  other than that they probably share similar statistical characteristics. in comparison  our study mainly focuses on the case when the similarity among existing data points varies with time  although we can also handle insertion and removal of data points over time. in   an algorithm is proposed to cluster moving objects based on a novel concept of microclustering. in   an incremental spectral clustering algorithm is proposed to handles similarity changes among objects that evolve with time. however  the focus of both  and  is to improve computation efficiency at the cost of lower cluster quality.
