the primary goal of web usage mining is the discovery of patterns in the navigational behavior of web users. standard approaches  such as clustering of user sessions and discovering association rules or frequent navigational paths  do not generally provide the ability to automatically characterize or quantify the unobservable factors that lead to common navigational patterns. it is  therefore  necessary to develop techniques that can automatically discover hidden semantic relationships among users as well as between users and web objects. probabilistic latent semantic analysis  plsa  is particularly useful in this context  since it can uncover latent semantic associations among users and pages based on the co-occurrence patterns of these pages in user sessions. in this paper  we develop a unified framework for the discovery and analysis of web navigational patterns based on plsa. we show the flexibility of this framework in characterizing various relationships among users and web objects. since these relationships are measured in terms of probabilities  we are able to use probabilistic inference to perform a variety of analysis tasks such as user segmentation  page classification  as well as predictive tasks such as collaborative recommendations. we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach through experiments performed on real-world data sets.
categories and subject descriptors
h.1  database management : database applications- data mining; i.1  artificial intelligence : learning; i.1
 pattern recognition : models-statistical
general terms
algorithms
keywords
web usage mining  user profiling  plsa
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
kdd'1  august 1  1  seattle  washington  usa.
copyright 1 acm 1-1/1 ...$1.
1. introduction
　web users exhibit different types of behavior depending on their information needs and their intended tasks. these tasks are captured implicitly by a collection of actions taken by users during their visits to a site. for example  in a dynamic application-based e-commerce web site  user tasks may be reflected by sequences of interactions with web applications to search a catalog or to make a purchase. on the other hand  in an information intensive site  such as a portal or an online news source  user tasks may be reflected in a series of user clicks on a collection of web pages with related content.
　the identification of intended user tasks can shed light on various types of user navigational behaviors. for example  in an e-commerce site  there may be many user groups with different  but overlapping  behavior types. these may include visitors who engage in  window shopping  by browsing through a variety of product pages in different categories; visitors who are goal-oriented showing interest in a specific product category; or visitors who tend to place items in their shopping cart  but not purchase those items. identifying these user tasks and behavior types may  for example  allow a site to distinguish between those who show a high propensity to buy versus whose who don't. this  in turn  can lead to automatic tools that can tailor the content of pages for those users accordingly.
　web usage mining techniques  1  1   which capture web users' navigational patterns  have achieved great success in various application areas such as web personalization  1  1  1  1   link prediction and analysis  1  1   web site evaluation or reorganization  1  1   web analytics and ecommerce data analysis  1  1   adaptive web sites  1  1   and web pre-fetching  1  1 . most current web usage mining systems use different data mining techniques  such as clustering  association rule mining  and sequential pattern mining to extract usage patterns from user historical navigational data. generally these usage patterns are standalone patterns at the pageview level. they  however  do not capture the intrinsic characteristics of web users' activities  nor can they quantify the underlying and unobservable factors that lead to specific navigational patterns.
　thus  to better understand the factors that lead to common navigational patterns  it is necessary to develop techniques that can automatically characterize the users' underlying navigational objectives and to discover the hidden semantic relationships among users as well as between users and web objects. a common approach for capturing the latent or hidden semantic associations among co-occurring objects is latent semantic analysis  lsa  . it is mostly used in automatic indexing and information retrieval   where lsa usually takes the  high dimensional  vector space representation of documents based on term frequency as a starting point and applies a dimension reducing linear projection  such as singular value decomposition  svd  to generate a reduced latent space representation.
　probabilistic latent semantic analysis  plsa  models  proposed by hofmann  1  1   provide a probabilistic approach for the discovery of latent variables which is more flexible and has a more solid statistical foundation than the standard lsa. the basis of plsa is a model often referred to as the aspect model . assuming that there exist a set of hidden factors underlying the co-occurences among two sets of objects  plsa uses expectation-maximization  em  algorithm to estimate the probability values which measure the relationships between the hidden factors and the two sets of objects. due to its great flexibility  plsa has been widely and successfully used in variety of application domain  including information retrieval   text learning  1  1  1  1   and co-citation analysis  1  1 .
　in this paper  we propose a web usage mining approach based on the plsa model. in the web usage scenario  as in information retrieval  we have co-occurrence data which  in this case  is comprised of web users and web objects. in this paper  we refer to the hidden factors that represent the latent relationships among these entities as tasks. this is to emphasize the fact that these factors generally represent the navigational objectives of users in a web site  as reflected in their interaction with the web objects.
　by applying the plsa model  we can effectively identify and characterize these hidden factors  thus quantitatively measuring the relationships between web users and tasks  as well as between web objects and tasks. these relationships are measured in terms of probabilities  which  in turn  allow for the discovery of a variety of usage patterns by using probabilistic inference. in this way  the model enables different types of analysis including the characterization of a task by a group of most related pages; the identification of prototypical users who perform a certain task; the identification of underlying tasks present in a specific user's activity; and the characterization of user groups  or segments  that perform a similar set of tasks.
　the primary contributions of this paper are two-fold: first  we develop a general framework for discovery and analysis of web navigational patterns based on the plsa model. secondly  we show  in detail  how this model can be used to generate various usage pattern  such as those described above  and point out possible applications  including a specific approach for web personalization based on the discovered user segments. furthermore  we illustrate many of these usage patterns by providing several illustrative examples based on real web usage data  and we quantitatively evaluate the effectiveness of derived user segments.
　the paper is organized as follows. in section 1 we provide an overview of probabilistic latent semantic analysis model as applied to web usage data. we present the details of deriving various usage patterns based on the plsa model in section 1. finally  we present our experiments and interpretation of the result in section 1 and conclude the paper in section 1.
1. probabilistic latent semantic modelsofwebusernavigations
　the overall process of web usage mining consists of three phrases: data preparation and transformation  pattern discovery  and pattern analysis. the data preparation phase transforms raw web log data into transaction data that can be processed by various data mining tasks. in the pattern discovery phase  a variety of data mining techniques  such as clustering  association rule mining  and sequential pattern discovery can be applied to the transaction data. the discovered patterns may then be analyzed and interpreted for use in such applications as web personalization.
　the usage data preprocessing phase  1  1  results in a set of n pageviews  p = {p1 p1 ... pn} and a set of m user sessions  u = {u1 u1 ... um}. a pageview is an aggregate representation of a collection of web objects  e.g. pages  contributing to the display on a user's browser resulting from a single user action  such as a click through  product purchase  or database query . the web session data can be conceptually viewed as an m 〜 n session-pageview binary matrix up =  w ui pj  m〜n  where w ui pj  represents the weight of pageview pj in a user session ui. the weights can be binary  representing the existence or non-existence of the pageview in the session  or they may be a function of the occurrence or duration of the pageview in that session.
　plsa is a latent variable model which associates hidden  unobserved  factor variable z = {z1 z1 ... zl} with observations in the co-occurences data. in our context  each observation corresponds to an access by a user to a web resource in a particular session which is represented as an entry of the m 〜 n co-occurrence matrix up.
　the probabilistic latent factor model can be described as the following generative model:
1. select a user session ui from u with probability pr ui  
1. pick a latent factor zk with probability pr zk|ui  
1. generate a pageview pj from p with probability pr pj|zk .
　as a result we obtain an observed pair  ui pj   while the latent factor variable zk is discarded. translating this process into a joint probability model results in the following:
　　　　　　pr ui pj  = pr ui    pr pj|ui   where
l
pr pj|ui  =	pr pj|zk    pr zk|ui   k=1
summing over all possible choices of zk from which the observation could have been generated. using bayes' rule  it is straightforward to transform the joint probability into:
.
　now  in order to explain a set of observations  u p   we need to estimate the parameters pr zk   pr ui|zk   pr pj|zk  
while maximizing the following likelihood l u p  of the observations 
	m	n
	l u p  =	w ui pj logpr ui pj .
i=1 j=1
　expectation-maximization  em  algorithm  is a wellknown approach to performing maximum likelihood parameter estimation in latent variable models. it alternates two steps:  1  an expectation  e  step where posterior probabilities are computed for latent variables  based on the current estimates of the parameters   1  a maximization  m  step  re-estimate the parameters in order to maximize the expectation of the complete data likelihood.
　the em algorithm begins with some initial values of pr zk   pr ui|zk   and pr pj|zk . in the expectation step we compute:
.
　in the maximization step  we aim at maximizing the expectation of the complete data likelihood e lc  
	m	n	l
e lc  =	w ui pj 	p zk|ui pj logpr ui pj 
	i=1 j=1	k=1
while taking into account the constraints  lk=1 pr zk  = 1  on the factor probabilities  as well as the following constraints on the two conditional probabilities:
	l	m
	 	pr ui|zk    1  = 1 
k=1 i=1
and
	l	n
     pr pj|zk    1  = 1. k=1 j=1
　through the use of lagrange multipliers  see  for details   we can solve the constraint maximization problem to get the following equations for re-estimated parameters:

　iterating the above computation of expectation and maximization steps monotonically increases the total likelihood of the observed data l u p  until a local optimal solution is reached.
　the computational complexity of this algorithm is o mnl   where m is the number of user sessions  n is the number of pageviews  and l is the number of factors. since the usage observation matrix is  in general  very sparse  the memory requirements can be dramatically reduced using efficient sparse matrix representation of the data.
1. discovery and analysis of usage pattern with plsa
　one of the main advantages of plsa model in web usage mining is that it generates probabilities which quantify relationships between web users and tasks  as well as web pages and tasks. from these basic probabilities  using probabilistic inference  we can derive relationships among users  among pages  and between users and pages. thus this framework provides a flexible approach to model a variety of types of usage patterns. in this section  we will describe various usage patterns that can be derived using the plsa model.
　as noted before  the plsa model generates probabilities pr zk   which measures the probability of a certain task is chosen; pr ui|zk   the probability of observing a user session given a certain task; and pr pj|zk   the probability of a page being visited given a certain task. applying bayes' rule to these probabilities  we can generate the probability that a certain task is chosen given an observed user session:

and the probability that a certain task is chosen given an observed pageview:

　in the following  we discuss how these models can be used to derive different kinds of usage patterns. we will provide several illustrative examples of such patterns  from real web usage data  in section 1.
1 characterizing tasks by pageviews or by user sessions
