the goal of clustering is to identify distinct groups in a dataset. the basic idea of model-based clustering is to approximate the data density by a mixture model  typically a mixture of gaussians  and to estimate the parameters of the component densities  the mixing fractions  and the number of components from the data. the number of distinct groups in the data is then taken to be the number of mixture components  and the observations are partitioned into clusters  estimates of the groups  using bayes' rule. if the groups are well separated and look gaussian  then the resulting clusters will indeed tend to be  distinct  in the most common sense of the word - contiguous  densely populated areas of feature space  separated by contiguous  relatively empty regions. if the groups are not gaussian  however  this correspondence may break down; an isolated group with a non-elliptical distribution  for example  may be modeled by not one  but several mixture components  and the corresponding clusters will no longer be well separated. we present methods for assessing the degree of separation between the components of a mixture model and between the corresponding clusters. we also propose a new clustering method that can be regarded as a hybrid between model-based and nonparametric clustering. the hybrid clustering algorithm prunes the cluster tree generated by hierarchical model-based clustering. starting with the tree corresponding to the mixture model chosen by the bayesian information criterion  it progressively merges clusters that do not appear to correspond to different modes of the data density.
categories and subject descriptors
i.1  pattern recognition : clustering; i.1  pattern

 supported by nsf grant dms-1 and nsa grant 1-
1.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
sigkdd '1 washington  dc  usa copyright 1 acm 1-1/1...$1.
recognition : models-statistical; g.1  probability and statistics : multivariate statistics
general terms
model-based clustering
keywords
model-based clustering  nonparametric clustering  density
estimation  unimodality
1.	introduction and motivation
¡¡the goal of clustering is to identify distinct groups in a dataset x = {x1 ...  xn}   rm. for example  when presented with  a typically higher dimensional version of  a dataset like the one in figure 1a we would like to detect that there appear to be two groups  and assign a group label to each observation.  throughout this paper we distinguish between  groups  and  clusters   which are estimates for the groups. 
