temporal text mining  ttm  is concerned with discovering temporal patterns in text information collected over time. since most text information bears some time stamps  ttm has many applications in multiple domains  such as summarizing events in news articles and revealing research trends in scientific literature. in this paper  we study a particular ttm task - discovering and summarizing the evolutionary patterns of themes in a text stream. we define this new text mining problem and present general probabilistic methods for solving this problem through  1  discovering latent themes from text;  1  constructing an evolution graph of themes; and  1  analyzing life cycles of themes. evaluation of the proposed methods on two different domains  i.e.  news articles and literature  shows that the proposed methods can discover interesting evolutionary theme patterns effectively.
categories and subject descriptors: h.1  information search and retrieval : clustering general terms: algorithms
keywords: temporal text mining  evolutionary theme patterns  theme threads  clustering
1.	introduction
모in many application domains  we encounter a stream of text  in which each text document has some meaningful time stamp. for example  a collection of news articles about a topic and research papers in a subject area can both be viewed as natural text streams with publication dates as time stamps. in such stream text data  there often exist interesting temporal patterns. for example  an event covered in news articles generally has an underlying temporal and evolutionary structure consisting of themes  i.e.  subtopics  characterizing the beginning  progression  and impact of the event  among others. similarly  in research papers  research topics may also exhibit evolutionary patterns. for example  the study of one topic in some time period may have influenced or stimulated the study of another topic after the
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
kdd'1  august 1  1  chicago  illinois  usa.
copyright 1 acm 1-1-x/1 ...$1.
time period. in all these cases  it would be very useful if we can discover  extract  and summarize these evolutionary theme patterns  etp  automatically. indeed  such patterns not only are useful by themselves  but also would facilitate organization and navigation of the information stream according to the underlying thematic structures.
모consider  for example  the asian tsunami disaster that happened in the end of 1. a query to google news
 http://news.google.com  returned more than 1 online news articles about this event within one month  jan.1 through feb.1  1 . it is generally very difficult to navigate through all these news articles. for someone who has not been keeping track of the event but wants to know about this disaster   a summary of this event would be extremely useful. ideally  the summary would include both the major subtopics about the event and any threads corresponding to the evolution of these themes. for example  the themes may include the report of the happening of the event  the statistics of victims and damage  the aids from the world  and the lessons from the tsunami. a thread can indicate when each theme starts  reaches the peak  and breaks  as well as which subsequent themes it influences. a timelinebased theme structure as shown in figure 1 would be a very informative summary of the event  which also facilitates navigation through themes.

figure 1: an example of theme thread structure
모in addition to the theme structure  revealing the strength of a theme at different time periods  or the  life cycle  of a theme  is also very useful. consider another scenario in the literature domain. there are often hundreds of papers published annually in a research area. a researcher  especially a beginning researcher  often wants to understand how the research topics in the literature have been evolving. for example  if a researcher wants to know about information retrieval  both the historical milestones and the recent research trends of information retrieval would be valuable for him/her. a plot  such as the one shown in figure 1  which visualizes the evolution patterns of research topics  would
not only serve as a good summary of the field  but also make it much easier for the researcher to selectively choose appropriate papers to read based on his/her research interests.

figure 1: an example of theme strength in ir
모in both scenarios  we clearly see a need for discovering evolutionary theme patterns in a text stream. in general  it is often very useful to discover the temporal patterns that may exist in a stream of text articles  a task which we refer to as temporal text mining  ttm . since most information bears some kinds of time stamps  ttm can be expected to have many applications in multiple domains.
모despite its importance  however  ttm has not been well addressed in the existing work. most existing text mining work does not consider the temporal structures of text  1  1 . there are some previous studies on ttm  1  1  1  1   but the proposed methods are generally inadequate for generating the evolutionary theme patterns as shown in the two examples above. a detailed discussion of related work is given in section 1.
모in this paper  we study the problem of discovering and summarizing the etps in a text stream. we define this problem and present general probabilistic methods for solving the problem through  1  discovering latent themes from text  which includes both interesting global themes and salient local themes in a given time period;  1  discovering theme evolutionary relations and constructing an evolution graph of themes; and  1  modeling theme strength over time and analyzing the life cycles of themes. we evaluate the proposed methods on two data sets - a collection of 1 day's worth of news articles about the tsunami event  dec.1  1 - feb.1  1  and the abstracts of the acm kdd conference papers from 1 through 1. the results show that our methods can discover many interesting etps from both data sets. in addition to news summarization and literature mining  the proposed ttm methods are also directly applicable to many other application domains  such as email analysis  mining user logs  mining customer reviews.
모the rest of the paper is organized as follows. in section 1  we formally define the general problem of etp discovery. in section 1  we present our approaches to extracting themes and constructing a theme evolution graph. in section 1  we further present a hidden markov model based method for analyzing the life cycles of themes. we discuss our experiments and results in section 1. finally  section 1 and section 1 are related work and conclusions  respectively.
1.	problem formulation
모the general problem of etp discovery can be formulated as follows.
모suppose we have a collection of time-indexed text documents  c = {d1 d1 ... dt}  where di refers to a document with time stamp i. each document is a sequence of words from a vocabulary set v = {w1 ... w|v |}. we define the following concepts.
모definition 1  theme  a theme in a text collection c is a probabilistic distribution of words that characterizes a semantically coherent topic or subtopic. formally  we represent a theme by a  theme-specific  unigram language model 붿  i.e.  a word distribution {p w|붿 }w뫍v . naturally  w뫍v p w|붿  = 1.
모using a word distribution to model topics is quite common in information retrieval and text mining  1  1  1 . high probability words of such a distribution often suggest what the theme is about. for example  a theme about the aid from the us to help recovery from the tsunami disaster may have high probabilities for words such as  u.s.    million    aid    bush   etc.
모definition 1  theme span  a theme span 붺 is defined as a theme 붿 spanning a given time interval l and is represented by h붿 s 붺  t 붺 i  where s 붺  and t 붺  are the starting and termination time stamps of l  respectively.
모a theme span is a useful concept for associating time with themes. for the purpose of ttm  a theme is almost always tagged with a time span. we thus use  theme  and  theme span  interchangeably whenever there is no ambiguity. we call a theme span that spans the entire text stream a transcollection theme. thus if 붺 = h붿 s ti is a trans-collection theme  we must have s = 1 and t = t. we use 붞 to denote the set of all theme spans.
모definition 1  evolutionary transition  let 붺1 = h붿1 s 붺1  t 붺1 i and 붺1 = h붿1 s 붺1  t 붺1 i 뫍 붞 be two theme spans. if t 붺1  뫞 s 붺1   붺1 terminates before 붺1 starts  and the similarity between theme span 붺1 and 붺1 is above a give threshold  we say that there is an evolutionary transition from 붺1 to 붺1  which we denote by 붺1   붺1. we also say that 붿1 is evolved from 붿1  or 붿1 evolves into 붿1. we use e   붞뫄붞 to denote all the evolutionary transitions  so that if  붺1 붺1  뫍 e  then 붺1   붺1.
모the concept of evolutionary transition is useful for describing the evolution relations between theme spans. with this concept  we can now define a particularly interesting theme pattern called a theme evolution thread.
모definition 1  theme evolution thread  let 붞 be a set of theme spans  a theme evolution thread is a sequence of theme spans 붺1 붺1 ... 붺n 뫍 붞 such that  붺i 붺i+1  뫍 e.
모intuitively  a theme evolution thread characterizes how a family of related themes evolve over time. since a text stream generally has multiple such theme threads  we now define another concept called theme evolution graph to characterize the overall theme evolution patterns of a text stream.
모definition 1  theme evolution graph  a theme evolution graph is a weighted directed graph g =  n e  in which each vertex v 뫍 n is a theme span  and each edge e 뫍 e is an evolutionary transition. the weight on an edge indicates the evolution distance. clearly  each path in a theme evolution graph represents a theme evolution thread. an example of a theme evolution graph is shown in figure 1  where each vertex is a theme span extracted from a subcollection obtained through non-overlapping partitioning of the stream into n sliced intervals. each edge is an evolutionary transition. the thickness of an edge indicates how close the two themes being connected are and how trustful

figure 1: an example of a theme evolution graph
the corresponding evolutionary transition is; a thicker edge indicates a closer distance between the themes and a more trustful transition. for example  the distance of 붿1   붿1 is smaller than that of 붿1   붿1  and the former is more trustful. we also see a theme evolution thread from 붿1  through 붿1  and all the way to 붿n1.
모given a text stream c  a major task of the general etp discovery problem is to extract a theme evolution graph from c automatically. such a graph can immediately be used as a summary of the themes and their evolution relations in the text stream  and can also be exploited to organize the text stream in a meaningful way. sometimes  a user may be interested in a specific theme. for example  a researcher may be interested in a particular subtopic. in this case  it is often useful to analyze the whole  life cycle  of a theme thread. thus another task of etp discovery is to compute the strength of a theme at different time periods so that we can see when the theme has started  when it is terminated  and whether there is any break in between.
모the etp discovery problem is challenging in many ways. first  it is a completely unsupervised task; there's no training data to discriminate theme spans. this indicates a great advantage of any techniques for etp discovery - no/minimum prior knowledge about a domain is assumed. second  compared with the problem of novelty detection and event tracking  which aims to segment the text and find the boundaries of events  1  1  1   the etp discovery problem involves a more challenging task of modeling the multiple subtopics at any time interval for an event  and aims to discover the changing and evolutionary relations between the theme spans. finally  the analysis of theme life cycles requires the system to decode the whole collection with themes and model the strength variations of each theme along the time line in a completely unsupervised way.
모in the next two sections  we propose and present probabilistic approaches for discovering etps and analyzing the life cycles of themes  respectively.
1.	evolution graph discovery
모given a stream of text c = {d1 d1 ... dt}  our goal is to extract a theme evolution graph from c automatically. at a high-level  our methods involve the following three steps:
1. partition the documents into n possibly overlapping subcollections with fixed or variable time intervals so that c = c1 뫋 ... 뫋 cn and ci = {dti ... dti+li 1} is a subcollection of li documents in the time span  ti ti + li   1 . in general  ti   ti+1  but it may be that ti +li  1   ti+1  since ci's may be overlapping. the actual choice of the interval lengths li and whether ci's should overlap are determined by specific applications.
1. extract the most salient themes 붣i = {붿i 1 ... 붿i ki} from each subcollection ci using a probabilistic mixture model.
1. for any themes in two different subcollections  붿1 뫍 붣i and 붿1 뫍 붣j where i   j  decide whether there is an evolutionary transition based on the similarity of 붿1 and 붿1.
step 1 is trivial; below we describe steps 1 & 1 in detail.
1	theme extraction
모we extract themes from each subcollection ci using a simple probabilistic mixture model as described in . in this method  words are regarded as data drawn from a mixture model with component models for the theme word distributions and a background word distribution. words in the same document share the same mixing weights. the model can be estimated using the expectation maximization em  algorithm  to obtain the theme word distributions.
모specifically  let 붿1 ... 붿k be k theme unigram language models  i.e.  word distributions  and 붿b be a background model for the whole collection c. a document d is regarded as a sample of the following mixture model:
p w : d  = 뷂bp w|붿b  +  1   뷂b 	k	 뷇	p w|붿   
where w is a word in document mixing weight for document d for choosing the j-th theme 붿j such that
모1  and 뷂b is the mixing weight for 붿b. the purpose of using a background model 붿b is to make the theme models more discriminative; since 붿b gives high probabilities to non-discriminative and non-informative words  we expect such words to be accounted for by 붿b and thus the theme models to be more discriminative.  estimated using the whole collection
모the additional parameters to estimate ci 1 뫞 j 뫞 k}. the log-likelihood of ci  log p ci|붦  is

where c w d  is the count of word w in document d.
모according to the em algorithm  we can use the following iterative updating formulas to estimate all the parameters.
{zd w} is a hidden variable and p zd w = j  indicates that the word w in document d is generated using theme j given that w is not generated from the background mode.
뷇d j n p n  w|붿j 

p zd w = j  = kj1  n 1  n  w|붿j1  뷇d j p

p zd w = b 	=	뷂bp w|붿b  +  1뷂 b뷂pb w |붿bkj=1 	뷇d j n   n  w|붿j  p
뷇d j n+1  =	kj1w뫍vw뫍c vw dc w d  1  1  p  zpd w zd w= b=  bp   zpd w zd w= j=  j1 
p n+1  w|붿j 	= d뫍ci c w d  1   p zd w = b  p zd w = j 

c w1 d  1   p z
	w1뫍v	d뫍ci	d w1 = b  p zd w1 = j 
모the algorithm is only guaranteed to find a local maximum of the likelihood. we use multiple trials to improve the local maximum we obtain. to measure the salience of theme j in ci and select the most salient themes from ci by using an empirically set threshold. we obtain the theme spans for ci by attaching the time span of ci to all the selected salient themes.
모the same model can be applied to the whole collection c to extract trans-collection themes; we will do that in section 1 to analyze the life cycles of trans-collection themes.
1	evolutionary transition discovery
모with the theme spans extracted from all the subcollections  we now turn to the discovery of evolutionary transitions. to discover any evolutionary transition between two theme spans  we use the kullback-leibler divergence  to measure their evolution distance. let 붺1 = h붿1 s 붺1  t 붺1 i and 붺1 = h붿1 s 붺1  t 붺1 i be two theme spans where t 붺1  뫞 s 붺1 . we assume that 붺1 has a smaller evolution distance to 붺1 if their unigram language models 붿1 and 붿1 are closer to each other. since the kl-divergence d 붿1||붿1  can model the additional new information in 붿1 as compared to 붿1  it appears to be a natural measure of evolution distance between two themes.

note that the kl-divergence is asymmetric and it makes more sense to use d 붿1||붿1  than d 붿1||붿1  to measure the evolution distance from 붿1 to 붿1.
모for every pair of theme spans 붺1 and 붺1 where t 붺1  뫞 s 붺1   we compute d 붿1||붿1 . if d 붿1||붿1  is above a threshold 뷅  we will infer that 붺1   붺1. the threshold 뷅 allows a user to flexibly control the strength of the theme transitions. once we extract the theme spans from all the subcollections and identify all the evolutionary transitions  we essentially have a theme evolution graph.
1.	analysis of theme life cycles
모the theme evolution graph discussed above gives us a microcosmic view of the etps - revealing the major theme spans within each time interval and their evolutionary structures. to obtain a macroscopic view of the etps  it would be useful to extract the global evolutionary patterns of themes over the whole text stream and analyze the  life cycle  of each specific theme.
모definition 1  theme life cycle  given a text collection tagged with time stamps and a set of trans-collection themes  we define the theme life cycle of each theme as the strength distribution of the theme over the entire time line. the strength of a theme at each time period is measured by the number of words generated by this theme in the documents corresponding to this time period  normalized by either the number of time points  giving an absolute strength   or the total number of words in the period  giving a relative strength . the absolute strength measures the absolute amount of text which a theme can explain  while the relative strength indicates which theme is relatively stronger in a time period.
모we now present a method based on hidden markov models  hmms   to model and decode the shift between trans-collection themes in the whole collection. based on the decoding results  we can then compute the theme strengths and analyze theme life cycles in a straightforward way.
모we first give a brief introduction to hmms. an hmm can be characterized by a set of hidden states s = {s1 ... sn}  a set of observable output symbols o = {o1 ... om}  an initial state probability distribution transition probability distribution each state si  and an output probability distribution for each state si. an hmm defines a generative probabilistic model for any sequence of symbols from o with parameters satisfying the following constraints:	1;

모to model the theme shifts in our text stream  we assume that the collection  which is represented as a long sequence of words  is stochastically generated from an hmm constructed in the following way. we first extract k trans-collection themes from the collection using the mixture model described in the previous section. we then construct a fully connected hmm with k + 1 states  of which k states correspond to the extracted k themes and the other one corresponds to a background theme language model estimated based on the whole collection. the entire vocabulary v is taken as the output symbol set  and the output probability distribution of each state is set to the multinomial distribution of words given by the corresponding theme language model. a 1-theme hmm is shown in figure 1.

figure 1: a 1-theme hmm
모the background state  which corresponds to the background theme model  aims to account for non-discriminative words  while the content words and subtopics are modeled by the states corresponding to the trans-collection themes. since the extracted themes are discriminative  we may reasonably assume that each theme can only shift to another theme through the background model. the unknown parameter set in the hmm is can be estimated using an em algorithm called baum-welch algorithm .
모after the initial state probabilities and transition probabilities are estimated  the viterbi algorithm  can be used to decode the text stream to obtain the most likely state sequence  i.e.  the most likely sequence of theme shifts  as shown in figure 1.
 once the whole stream c = {d1 ... dt} is decoded with the labels of themes  we can use a fixed-size sliding window of time to measure the strength of each theme at a time point1. let di = di1...di|di| be the sequence of words in di. the absolute and relative strengths of theme i at time t is computed as:

1
 the use of a sliding window also avoids the  report delay  problem in the news domain.

figure 1: decoding the collection
모where 붻 dt1j i  = 1 if word dt1j is labeled as theme i; otherwise 붻 dt1j i  = 1. w is the size of the sliding window in terms of time points.
astrength i t 
nstrength i t 	=	k j=1 astrength j t 
|dt1|
	t1뫍 t w1  t+w1  	j=1 붻 dt1j i 
	=	
t1뫍 t w1  t+w1   |dt1|
the life cycle of each theme can then be modeled as the variation of the theme strengths over time.
모the analysis of theme life cycles thus involves the following four steps:  1  construct an hmm to model how themes shift between each other in the collection.  1  estimate the unknown parameters of the hmm using the whole stream collection as observed example sequence.  1  decode the collection and label each word with the hidden theme model from which it is generated.  1  for each trans-collection theme  analyze when it starts  when it terminates  and how it varies over time.
1.	experiments and results
1	data preparation
모two data sets are constructed to evaluate the proposed etp discovery methods. the first  tsunami news data  consists of news articles about the event of asia tsunami dated dec. 1 to feb. 1. we downloaded 1 news articles from 1 selected sources  with the keyword query  tsunami . as shown in table 1  three of the sources are in asia  two of them are in europe and the rest are in the u.s.
news sourcenationnews sourcenationbbcuktimes of indiaindiacnnusvoauseconomics timesindiawashington postusnew york timesuswashington timesusreutersukxinhua newschinatable 1: news sources of asia tsunami data set
모the second data set consists of the abstracts in kdd conference proceedings from 1 to 1. all the abstracts were extracted from the full-text pdf files downloaded from the acm digital library1. 1 articles were excluded because they were not recognizable by the pdf1text software in linux 

1 http://www.acm.org/dl giving us a total of 1 abstracts. the basic statistics of the two data sets are shown in table 1. we intentionally did not perform stemming or stop word pruning in order to test the robustness of our algorithms.
data set# of docsavglengthtime rangeasia tsunami1.1/1 - 1/1kdd abs.1.1-1table 1: basic information of data sets
모on each data set  two experiments are designed:  1  partition the collection into time intervals  discover the theme evolution graph and identify theme evolution threads.  1  discover trans-collection themes and analyze their life cycles. the results are discussed below.
1	experiments on asia tsunami
모since news reports on the same topic may appear earlier in one source but later in another  i.e.   report delay    partitioning news articles into overlapping  as opposed to non-overlapping subcollections seems to be more reasonable. we thus partition the our news data into 1 time intervals  each of which spans about two weeks and is half overlapping with the previous one. we use the mixture model discussed in section 1 to extract the most salient themes in each time interval. we set the background parameter 뷂b = 1 and number of themes in each time interval to be 1. the variation of 뷂b is discussed later. table 1 shows the top 1 words with the highest probabilities in each theme span. we see that most of these themes suggest meaningful subtopics in the context of the asia tsunami event.

figure 1: theme evolution graph for asia tsunami
모with these theme spans  we use kl-divergence to further identify evolutionary transitions. figure 1 shows a theme evolution graph discovered from asia tsunami data when the threshold for evolution distance is set to 뷅 = 1. from figure 1  we can see several interesting evolution threads which are annotated with symbols.
모the thread labeled with a may be about warning systems for tsunami. it is interesting to see that the nation covered by the thread seems to have evolved from the u.s. in period l1  to china in l1  and then to japan in l1. in thread b  themes 1  1  and 1 in period l1 indicate the aids and financial support from un  from local area  and special aids for children  respectively. they all show an evolutionary transition to theme 1  donation from uk  and theme 1  aid from

l1:
dec/
1/
1
-
jan/
1/
1system 1year 1debt 1aceh 1annan 1match 1bush 1silence 1club 1indonesia 1u.n. 1xi 1warning 1british 1paris 1military 1summit 1players 1dollars 1new 1bank 1banda 1children 1cricket 1million 1celebrations 1moratorium 1indonesian 1powell 1game 1small 1uk 1freeze 1province 1nbc 1zealand 1us 1music 1repayments 1workers 1million 1australia 1conference 1london 1billion 1foreign 1disease 1sudan 1meeting 1sydney 1u.n. 1islands 1who 1captain 1egeland 1blair 1nations 1aid 1unicef 1ponting 1l1:
dec/
1/
1
-
jan/
1/
1countries 1mr 1aceh 1missing 1her 1match 1debt 1blair 1aid 1thailand 1islands 1cricket 1system 1british 1powell 1bodies 1nicobar 1players 1nations 1rs 1relief 1dead 1i 1xi 1china 1britons 1indonesia 1sweden 1she 1you 1warning 1uk 1annan 1thai 1andaman 1zealand 1paris 1donations 1u.s. 1swedish 1beach 1game 1club 1crore 1united 1police 1sea 1points 1bank 1tamil 1military 1dna 1my 1captain 1chinese 1public 1u.n. 1tourists 1island 1cricket 1l1:
jan/
1/
1
-
jan/
1/
1chinese 1tamil 1toll 1warning 1united 1thailand 1british 1sri 1bodies 1system 1powell 1missing 1uk 1lanka 1death 1islands 1bush 1phuket 1china 1nadu 1dead 1sea 1u.s. 1khao 1hong 1tigers 1debt 1nicobar 1states 1her 1kong 1government 1food 1pacific 1mr. 1beach 1donations 1lankan 1paris 1water 1nations 1lak 1red 1nicobar 1indonesia 1japan 1$ 1swedish 1concert 1singh 1club 1kobe 1relief 1sweden 1cross 1rebels 1corpses 1quake 1million 1hotel 1l1:
jan/
1/
1
-
jan/
1/
1aceh 1funding 1phi 1concert 1ltte 1iraq 1talks 1iraq 1her 1kobe 1tamil 1bush 1gam 1eid 1asean 1singer 1talks 1billion 1rebels 1regional 1resort 1stars 1local 1pilgrims 1peace 1festival 1palu 1stadium 1uk 1budget 1indonesian 1congressional 1palu 1wales 1tigers 1deficit 1province 1mosque 1cancer 1japan 1hafun 1house 1free 1rice 1phuket 1rock 1norwegian 1boat 1movement 1month 1hui 1millennium 1prabhakaran 1trump 1rebel 1military 1fleming 1live 1kalpakkam 1spending 1l1:
jan/
1/
1
-
feb/
1/
1jones 1billion 1boat 1clinton 1debt 1talks 1palu 1$ 1tourism 1var 1meeting 1aceh 1station 1iraq 1samui 1nepal 1finance 1peace 1pierson 1house 1asean 1summit 1brown 1indonesian 1song 1budget 1jal 1saarc 1exchange 1rebels 1north 1request 1tourists 1dhaka 1ministers 1helsinki 1korea 1funding 1accident 1construction 1agreed 1conflict 1miss 1white 1month 1bangladesh 1gold 1province 11.1afghanistan 1joke 1envoy 1imf 1sidesshow 1baby 1marsh 1techniques 1economic 1autonomytable 1: theme spans extracted from asia tsunami dataus  in l1. the latter theme further evolves into theme 1 in l1  which is mainly about money support from us. thread c begins with music-related events and aids from uk. it shifts to talk about concerts in hong kong and then japan with the purpose of raising funds for donation. thread d is about the personal experiences of survivors. it starts with theme 1 in l1  goes through theme 1 in l1  theme 1 in l1  and finally evolves into theme 1 in l1. there are also several short but noticeable theme evolution threads. for example  thread e is about cricket matches for donation  while thread f is about deaths and losses in the disaster.
모in the latest two time intervals  most themes are no longer about the tsunami event  indicating that the event was probably receiving diminishing attention in these two periods  which can be seen more clearly later from the analysis of the life cycles of themes. there are two politics-related short theme threads  i.e.  g and h . in thread g  theme 1 in l1 is about political issues   rebels  and  peace  . it splits into two themes in l1  about north korea and the aceh peace talk  respectively. theme 1 and theme 1 in l1 represent criticisms on the iraq affair  one for military issues and one for the high expenditure/cost . in l1  they merged into a single theme  which mentions the budget on iraq and afghanistan issues. interestingly  by linking back to the articles  it turns out to be arguing for shrinking the budget on the war issues and offering more aid for the disaster.
모note that multiple threads may share one or more common themes  resulting in thread ambiguity. for example  themes 1  1 and 1 of l1 all have a high similarity to theme 1 of l1. in the analysis above  we only included theme 1 of l1 in thread c  because themes 1 and 1 do not appear to be similar to theme 1 of l1 in the same way as theme 1 of l1 is. a very interesting future research direction would be to study how we can automatically perform thread disambiguation.
모our second experiment aims to model the life cycles of trans-collection themes. in this experiment  we use two individual sources  cnn and xinhua news  instead of the whole mixed collection to avoid  report delay . the five transcollection themes extracted from cnn and xinhua news are shown in table 1.
모the five themes from cnn roughly correspond to  1  research and lessons about the tsunami;  1  personal experience of survivors;  1  special aid program for children;  1  general reports and statistics;  1  aids and donations from the world  especially from the u.s. the five themes from xinhua roughly correspond to  1  statistics of death and missing;  1  reports and stories at the scene;  1  donations from china;  1  aids and donations from the world;  1  research and lessons about the tsunami. some themes  e.g.  cnn-theme1 and xinhua-theme1  are common to both sources  while some others  e.g.  cnn-theme1 and xinhua-theme1  clearly reflect the different regions of the two sources.
모in figure 1 we plot the absolute strengths of the transcollection themes over time for cnn  w = 1 . we see that the absolute strengths of all five themes are increasing in the first 1 days after dec. 1  1. reports on aids for children and aids from the world begin to decay after that. general reports and statistics starts to decay around jan 1 for the rest of the time. around jan. 1th  the theme

c
n
nsystem 11children 1aceh 1bush 1warning 1wave 1debt 1indonesia 1$ 1ocean 1beach 1hospital 1said 1million 1indian 1water 1baby 1military 1relief 1pacific 1when 1club 1u.n. 1united 1earthquake 1saw 1paris 1number 1aid 1quake 1sea 1child 1survivors 1powell 1tsunami 1thailand 1her 1reported 1u.s. 1ocean 1family 1police 1helicopters 1states 1scientists 1ran 1moratorium 1killed 1u.n. 1x
i
n
h
u
athailand 1aceh 1chinese 1dollars 1system 1thai 1province 1china 1million 1warning 1missing 1indonesian 1yuan 1us 1early 1victims 1tidal 1countries 1aid 1meeting 1philippine 1waves 1beijing 1united 1ocean 1confirmed 1killed 1travel 1countries 1small 1residents 1quake 1$ 1un 1international 1tourists 1island 1donated 1annan 1conference 1percent 1dead 1cross 1debt 1natural 1number 1death 1donation 1reconstruction 1disasters 1table 1: trans-collection themes extracted from cnn and xinhua news
figure 1: absolute strength life cycles in cnn data
on the research and lessons about tsunami starts to increase again. the same pattern is discovered in reports on personal experiences  which is probably because survivors had come back to their home country around that time. both themes drop sharply around jan. 1. after jan. 1  all 1 themes retain a low strength level  indicating the event was receiving diminishing attention. the normalized strengths of themes in the cnn data show similar patterns.
모in figure 1  we show the absolute and normalized strengths of the five trans-collection themes over time in xinghua news  w = 1 . we see that  in the first week beginning dec. 1th 1  all 1 themes are increasing rapidly  but they all begin to decay around jan. 1th except for stories and reports at the scene  which increases again after a roughly 1-day period of mild decreasing. the theme about death statistics begins to decay all the time after jan. 1. both aids from china and the research and lessons about tsunami present a second rise in late january  although not as significant as the first one. in the normalized strength plot  it is easy to see that before jan 1rd  the dominating theme is theme 1. in the next 1 days  aid from the world is most significant. in the following 1 days   on-scene stories  is the dominating theme  although its absolute strength is decreasing for most of the time. in the last time period when the overall coverage of the topic had significantly decreased  aids from china is relatively stronger than other themes. comparing cnn and xinhua  we see the life cycles of the correlated themes in the two data sets exhibit comparable patterns but with some differences.
1	experiments on kdd abstracts
모the publication year naturally suggests a non-overlapping partition of the kdd abstract data. we thus treat all the abstracts published in one year as one time interval. the theme spans extracted from each year using the mixture

figure 1: absolute  top  and normalized  bottom  strength life cycles in xinhua news
model with 뷂b = 1 are shown in table 1. the number of themes slightly differs from year to year because we apply a threshold to select only the most salient themes as described in section 1. similar to what we have seen on the news data  the themes here are also mostly meaningful in the context of kdd publications. the three themes in the year of 1 are about association rule mining  clustering  and classification respectively  which are all traditional data mining topics  compared with the new topics  such as spatial data mining  theme 1  and gene and microarray mining  theme 1   extracted in the year of 1.
모a theme evolution graph extracted using an evolution distance threshold of 뷅 = 1 is shown in figure 1  where we see several interesting theme threads.
모thread a starts with theme 1 in 1  about classification . it first evolves into theme 1 in 1  typical classification techniques such as svm   and then evolves into web classification in 1. the next theme span on this thread is about clustering and random variables  which has some influence on theme 1 in 1. another evolution thread  b  starts with association rule mining in 1  and transits into frequent item set in 1. both themes show strong evolu-


t
h
e
m
e
1association 1abstract 1rules 1web 1clustering 1topic 1rules 1revision 1datasets 1hierarchical 1indices 1algorithms 1associations 1clustering 1artificial 1classification 1recognition 1correlation 1rule 1test 1support 1features 1mixture 1image 1attribute 1die 1rule 1analysis 1pattern 1mixture 1dimension 1terms 1svm 1markov 1random 1lda 1median 1classi 1criteria 1systems 1cluster 1metrics 1attributes 1protein 1classification 1topics 1components 1spatial 1polish 1control 1linear 1classification. 1clustering 1semantic 1transaction 1functional 1useful 1intrusion 1variables 1incremental 1t
h
e
m
e
1algorithms 1rules 1disconnected 1gene 1information 1genes 1abstract 1function 1web 1time 1cube 1problem 1eps 1sequence 1models 1series 1web 1graph 1objects 1set 1components 1change 1social 1structure 1distance 1minimality 1graph 1statistical 1weighted 1algorithms 1clustering 1discovered 1boosting 1may 1retrieval 1collection 1sampling 1protein 1dimensionality 1detection 1distance 1subset 1problem 1minimal 1random 1source 1user 1microarray 1bayesian 1functional 1reduction 1kernel 1search 1semantic 1profiles 1tuberculosis 1outlier 1base 1networks 1samples 1t
h
e
m
e
1abstract 1students 1item 1classification 1database 1part 1itemsets 1level 1database 1algorithm 1data 1reviews 1rules 1aggregate 1sets 1text 1expression 1bom 1local 1statistical 1frequent 1unlabeled 1gene 1opinion 1tree 1statistics 1compounds 1document 1results 1maximal 1decision 1user 1unexpected 1documents 1cabin-level 1sentences 1classifier 1cation 1knowledge 1labeled 1mining 1product 1class 1distributed 1changes 1customer 1voting 1receiver 1incremental 1decision 1molfea 1approach 1study 1positive 1bayes 1models 1human 1learning 1tree 1internal 1 1 theme1 t
h
e
m
e
1manufacturing 1 rule 1 clustering 1copies 1inference 1problems 1 optimal 1 retrieval 1stream 1failing 1demographic 1 clustering 1 symp 1mlc 1learning 1customers 1 rocch 1 estimators 1generation 1tivo 1training 1 smoothing 1 very 1data 1itemsets 1similarity 1 association 1 complexity 11shopping 1yield 1 sets 1 different 1image 1pattern 1svms 1 causality 1 behavior 1frequent 1image 1cost 1 corpus 1 each 1part 1dense 1measures 1 term 1 small 1important 1constraints 1table 1: theme spans extracted from kdd abstract datafigure 1: theme evolution graph from kdd data
tionary relations to theme 1 in 1  and the frequent item set theme shows some weak evolutionary influence on theme 1 in 1  gene expression mining .
모another interesting group of edges are tagged with symbol c. starting with classification in 1  it transits into theme 1 in 1  statistical analysis and decision making . the path further connects theme 1 in 1  and then makes an interesting transition into text classification in 1. theme 1 in 1 itself also has a strong evolutionary relation to text classification. this path ends at theme 1 in 1  which covers the web and social networks. the discussion of web mining has not appeared as an explicit theme until theme 1 in 1  which evolves into web and social networks in 1 through theme 1 in 1.
모before year 1  there was no explicit theme about data mining in biological data. there are two themes  theme 1  theme 1  which mention protein functionalities  but they fail to reappear in 1. a strong explicit theme evolution thread of mining biological data  path e  starts with theme 1 in year 1 and evolves into theme 1 in 1 and theme 1 in 1   respectively.
모as in the news data  we also analyzed the life cycles of trans-collection themes in kdd abstracts. seven dominating trans-collection themes are shown in table 1 and the interesting patterns of life cycles are presented in figure 1  w = 1 . some new topics  such as spatial-temporal data mining  have not shown up as trans-collection themes  because when we consider the whole stream  they are not among the dominating topics. from figure 1  we see that the normalized strength of theme 1 decreases monotonically from 1. this theme is about a traditional application area of data mining - marketing and customer analysis. another theme showing a decaying pattern is association rule mining  which keeps decreasing after its peak in 1. in the year 1  there is very little work on mining web information. this topic keeps growing in the following three years  and drops a bit after its acme in the year 1. mining from genes and biology data  as highlighted  keeps increasing over the 1 years from a very low level to one of the strongest themes. theme 1  which covers time series and other applications of clustering  shows an irregular pattern before 1 but remains stable after that.
모there are also themes  such as classification  theme 1  and clustering  theme 1  mostly theoretical aspect  especially dimension reduction   which are somehow stable. indeed  the classification theme appears to be among the strongest themes over the whole time line. considering that several themes  theme 1  theme 1  and theme 1  all cover clustering  we may also infer that clustering is another major dominating theme in kdd publications.
1	parameter tuning
모in our methods for etp discovery  there are a few parameters that are meant to provide the necessary flexibility for a


marketing 1gene 1clustering 1set 1tree 1rules 1distance 1customer 1genes 1web 1series 1decision 1association 1objects 1models 1expression 1selection 1manufacturing 1classification 1support 1reduction 1customers 1probability 1user 1time 1itemsets 1rule 1clustering 1business 1time 1text 1clustering 1bayes 1framework 1similarity 1no-show 1coherent 1distance 1test 1estimates 1outliers 1euclidean 1web 1microarray 1pages 1patterns 1probability 1useful 1dimensionality 1table 1: trans-collection themes extracted from kdd abstract data1 1 1.1 1 1.1 1 1 time  year 
figure 1: normalized strength life cycles in kdd
user to control the pattern analysis results. we now discuss them in some detail.
모in the mixture model for theme extraction  뷂b controls the strength of our background model  which is used to  absorb  non-informative words from the themes. in general  뷂b should be set to reflect a user's knowledge about the noise  i.e.  the non-informative common words  in the text stream; the more noise we believe our data set has  the larger 뷂b should be. our experiments have shown that  in ordinary english text  the value of 뷂b can be set to a value between 1 and 1. within this range  the setting of 뷂b does not affect the extracted themes significantly  but it does affect the top words with the highest probabilities; a smaller 뷂b tends to cause non-informative common words to show up in the top word list. parameter k represents the expected number of subtopics in a subcollection. in our experiments  we determine the number of themes by using a relatively large k and drop a theme j  if the value of is significantly low.
모another parameter is the evolution distance threshold 뷅. this parameter has a  zooming  effect for the discovered theme evolution graph. a tighter  smaller  뷅 would only allow us to see the strongest evolutionary transitions  whereas a looser  larger  뷅 would allow us to examine some weaker evolutionary transitions as well.
모yet another parameter is the size of sliding window w  which controls the amount of supporting documents when computing the strength of theme 붿 at time t and affects the smoothness of the life cycle curve. a small w introduces less smoothing and would allow us to see the temporal patterns in high resolution  but may also make it difficult to see the overall trend. a larger w would give a smoother curve  but may hide some interesting local variation patterns. regarding the  report delay  problem in the news domain  a reasonable value for w appears to be 1 days  1 days at each side of time t .
1.	related work
모while ttm has not been well studied  there are several lines of research related to our work. for example  in kleinberg's work on discovering bursty and hierarchical structures in streams   text streams are converted to temporal frequency data and an infinite-state automaton is used to model the stream. detection of novel topics and trends in text streams has been studied by several researchers  1  1  1  1  1  1   but their focus is to identify emerging trends rather than summarize the complete evolutionary theme patterns in a given text stream as we do.
모an interesting related work to our analysis of theme life cycles is   where perkio and others used a multinomial pca model to extract themes from a text collection and they used a hidden theme-document weight  which is similar to 뷇d j in section 1  to compute the strength of a theme. the major difference between our work and theirs is that we model the theme transitions in a context-sensitive way with an hmm  which presumably captures the natural proximity of similar topics better.
모text clustering is another well studied problem relevant to our work. specifically  the aspect models studied in  1  1  1  are related to the mixture theme model we use to extract themes. however  these works do not consider temporal structures in text. nallapati and others studied how to discover sub-clusters in a news event and structure them by their dependency  which could also generate a graph structure . a major difference between our work and theirs is that they perform document level clustering  while we perform theme level word clustering. another difference is that they do not consider the variations of subtopics in different time periods while we analyze life cycles of themes.
모since a theme evolution graph and theme life cycle can serve as a good summary of a collection  our work is also partially related to document summarization  e.g.   1  1  . allan and others presented a news summarization method based on ranking and selecting sentences obeying temporal order . however  summarization intends to retain the explicit information in text in order to maintain fidelity  while we aim at extracting non-obvious implicit themes and their evolutionary patterns.
1.	conclusions
모text streams often contain latent temporal theme structures which reflect how different themes influence each other and evolve over time. discovering such evolutionary theme patterns can not only reveal the hidden topic structures  but also facilitate navigation and digestion of information based on meaningful thematic threads. in this paper  we propose general probabilistic approaches to discover evolutionary theme patterns from text streams in a completely unsupervised way. to discover the evolutionary theme graph  our method would first generate word clusters  i.e.  themes  for each time period and then use the kullback-leibler divergence measure to discover coherent themes over time. such an evolution graph can reveal how themes change over time and how one theme in one time period has influenced other themes in later periods. we also propose a method based on hidden markov models for analyzing the life cycle of each theme. this method would first discover the globally interesting themes and then compute the strength of a theme in each time period. this allows us to not only see the trends of strength variations of themes  but also compare the relative strengths of different themes over time.
모we evaluated our methods using two different data sets. one is a stream of 1 days' news articles about the tsunami disaster that happened recently in asia  and the other is the abstracts of the kdd conference proceedings from 1 to 1. in both cases  the proposed methods can generate meaningful temporal theme structures and allow us to summarize and analyze the text data from temporal perspective. our methods are generally applicable to any text stream data and thus have many potential applications in temporal text mining.
모there are several interesting directions to further extend this work. first  we have only considered a flat structure of themes; it would be interesting to explore hierarchical theme clustering  which can give us a picture of theme evolutions at different resolutions. second  we can develop a temporal theme mining system based on the proposed methods to help a user navigate the stream information space based on evolutionary structures of themes. such a system can be very useful for managing all kinds of text stream data. finally  temporal text mining  ttm  represents a promising new direction in text mining that has not yet been wellexplored. in addition to evolutionary theme patterns  there are many other interesting patterns such as associations of themes across multiple streams that are interesting to study.
1.	acknowledgments
모we thank tao tao for his constructive technical comments and hang su for helping collect the tsunami data. we are grateful to the three anonymous reviewers for their extremely useful comments. this material is based in part upon work supported by the national science foundation under award numbers career-iis-1 and itr-iis1.
