topic detection and tracking  and topic segmentation  play an important role in capturing the local and sequential information of documents. previous work in this area usually focuses on single documents  although similar multiple documents are available in many domains. in this paper  we introduce a novel unsupervised method for shared topic detection and topic segmentation of multiple similar documents based on mutual information  mi  and weighted mutual information  wmi  that is a combination of mi and term weights. the basic idea is that the optimal segmentation maximizes mi or wmi . our approach can detect shared topics among documents. it can find the optimal boundaries in a document  and align segments among documents at the same time. it also can handle single-document segmentation as a special case of the multi-document segmentation and alignment. our methods can identify and strengthen cue terms that can be used for segmentation and partially remove stop words by using term weights based on entropy learned from multiple documents. our experimental results show that our algorithm works well for the tasks of single-document segmentation  shared topic detection  and multi-document segmentation. utilizing information from multiple documents can tremendously improve the performance of topic segmentation  and using wmi is even better than using mi for the multi-document segmentation.
categories and subject descriptors
h.1  information storage and retrieval : information search and retrieval-clustering; h.1  information storage and retrieval : content analysis and indexing- linguistic processing; i.1  artificial intelligence : natural language processing-text analysis; i.1  pattern recognition : clustering-algorithms;similarity measures
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
sigir'1  july 1  1  amsterdam  the netherlands.
copyright 1 acm 1-1-1/1 ...$1.
general terms
algorithms  design  experimentation
keywords
topic segmentation  shared topic detection  topic alignment  mutual information  multiple documents  term weight
1.	introduction
모many researchers have worked on topic detection and tracking  tdt   and topic segmentation during the past decade. topic segmentation intends to identify the boundaries in a document with the goal to capture the latent topical structure. topic segmentation tasks usually fall into two categories : text stream segmentation where topic transition is identified  and coherent document segmentation in which documents are split into sub-topics. the former category has applications in automatic speech recognition  while the latter one has more applications such as partial-text query of long documents in information retrieval  text summary  and quality measurement of multiple documents. previous research in connection with tdt falls into the former category  targeted on topic tracking of broadcast speech data and newswire text  while the latter category has not been studied very well.
모traditional approaches perform topic segmentation on documents one at a time  1  1  1 . most of them perform badly in subtle tasks like coherent document segmentation . often  end-users seek documents that have the similar content. search engines  like  google  provide links to obtain similar pages. at a finer granularity  users may actually be looking to obtain sections of a document similar to a particular section that presumably discusses a topic of the users interest. thus  the extension of topic segmentation from single documents to identifying similar segments from multiple similar documents with the same topic is a natural and necessary direction  and multi-document topic segmentation is expected to have a better performance since more information is utilized.
모traditional approaches using similarity measurement based on term frequency generally have the same assumption that similar vocabulary tends to be in a coherent topic segment  1  1  1 . however  they usually suffer the issue of identifying stop words. for example  additional document-dependent stop words are removed together with the generic stop words in . there are two reasons that we do not remove stop words directly. first  identifying stop words is another issue  that requires estimation in each domain. removing common stop words may result in the loss of useful information in a specific domain. second  even though stop words can be identified  hard classification of stop words and nonstop words cannot represent the gradually changing amount of information content of each word. we employ a soft classification using term weights.
모in this paper  we view the problem of topic segmentation as an optimization issue using information theoretic techniques to find the optimal boundaries of a document given the number of text segments so as to minimize the loss of mutual information  mi   or a weighted mutual information  wmi   after segmentation and alignment. this is equal to maximizing the mi  or wmi . the mi focuses on measuring the difference among segments whereas previous research focused on finding the similarity  e.g. cosine distance  of segments  1  1  1 . topic alignment of multiple similar documents can be achieved by clustering sentences on the same topic into the same cluster. single-document topic segmentation is just a special case of the multi-document topic segmentation and alignment problem. terms can be co-clustered as in  at the same time  given the number of clusters  but our experimental results show that this method results in a worse segmentation  see tables 1  1  and 1 . usually  human readers can identify topic transition based on cue words  and can ignore stop words. inspired by this  we give each term  or term cluster  a weight based on entropy among different documents and different segments of documents. not only can this approach increase the contribution of cue words  but it can also decrease the effect of common stop words  noisy word  and document-dependent stop words. these words are common in a document. many methods based on sentence similarity require that these words are removed before topic segmentation can be performed . our results in figure 1 show that term weights are useful for multi-document topic segmentation and alignment.
모the major contribution of this paper is that it introduces a novel method for topic segmentation using mi and shows that this method performs better than previously used criteria. also  we have addressed the problem of topic segmentation and alignment across multiple documents  whereas most existing research focused on segmentation of single documents. multi-document segmentation and alignment can utilize information from similar documents and improves the performance of topic segmentation greatly. obviously  our approach can handle single documents as a special case when multiple documents are unavailable. it can detect shared topics among documents to judge if they are multiple documents on the same topic. we also introduce the new criterion of wmi based on term weights learned from multiple similar documents  which can improve performance of topic segmentation further. we propose an iterative greedy algorithm based on dynamic programming and show that it works well in practice. some of our prior work is in .
모the rest of this paper is organized as follows: in section 1  we review related work. section 1 contains a formulation of the problem of topic segmentation and alignment of multiple documents with term co-clustering  a review of the criterion of mi for clustering  and finally an introduction to wmi. in section 1  we first propose the iterative greedy algorithm of topic segmentation and alignment with term co-clustering  and then describe how the algorithm can be optimized by us-

figure 1: illustration of multi-document segmentation and alignment.
ing dynamic programming. in section 1  experiments about single-document segmentation  shared topic detection  and multi-document segmentation are described  and results are presented and discussed to evaluate the performance of our algorithm. conclusions and some future directions of the research work are discussed in section 1.
1.	previous work
모generally  the existing approaches to text segmentation fall into two categories: supervised learning  1  1  1  and unsupervised learning  1  1  1  1  1  1  1 . supervised learning usually has good performance  since it learns functions from labelled training sets. however  often getting large training sets with manual labels on document sentences is prohibitively expensive  so unsupervised approaches are desired. some models consider dependence between sentences and sections  such as hidden markov model  1  1   maximum entropy markov model   and conditional random fields   while many other approaches are based on lexical cohesion or similarity of sentences  1  1  1  1  1 . some approaches also focus on cue words as hints of topic transitions . while some existing methods only consider information in single documents  1  1   others utilize multiple documents  1  1 . there are not many works in the latter category  even though the performance of segmentation is expected to be better with utilization of information from multiple documents. previous research studied methods to find shared topics  and topic segmentation and summarization between just a pair of documents .
모text classification and clustering is a related research area which categorizes documents into groups using supervised or unsupervised methods. topical classification or clustering is an important direction in this area  especially co-clustering of documents and terms  such as lsa   plsa   and approaches based on distances and bipartite graph partitioning  or maximum mi  1  1   or maximum entropy  1  1 . criteria of these approaches can be utilized in the issue of topic segmentation. some of those methods have been extended into the area of topic segmentation  such as plsa  and maximum entropy   but to our best knowledge  using mi for topic segmentation has not been studied.
1.	problem formulation
모our goal is to segment documents and align the segments across documents  figure 1 . let t be the set of terms {t1 t1 ... tl}  which appear in the unlabelled set of documents d = {d1 d1 ... dm}. let sd be the set of sentences for document d 뫍 d  i.e.{s1 s1 ... snd}. we have a 1d matrix of term frequency  in which the three dimensions are random variables of d  sd  and t. sd actually is a random vector including a random variable for each d 뫍 d. the term frequency can be used to estimate the joint probability distribution p d sd t   which is p t d s  = t t d s /nd  where t t d s  is the number of t in d's sentence s and nd is the total number of terms in d. s  represents the set of segments {s 1 s 1 ... s p} after segmentation and alignment among multiple documents  where the number of segments |s | = p. a segment  si of document d is a sequence of adjacent sentences in d. since for different documents si may discuss different sub-topics  our goal is to cluster adjacent sentences in each document into segments  and align similar segments among documents  so that for different documents s i is about the same sub-topic. the goal is to find the optimal topic segmentation and alignment mapping

and  for all d 뫍
d  where  si is ith segment with the constraint that only adjacent sentences can be mapped to the same segment  i.e. for	  where p is the segment number  and if i   j  then for d  s q is missing. after segmentation and alignment  random vector sd becomes an aligned random variable s . thus  p d sd t  becomes p d s t   .
모term co-clustering is a technique that has been employed  to improve the accuracy of document clustering. we evaluate the effect of it for topic segmentation. a term t is mapped to exactly one term cluster. term co-clustering involves simultaneously finding the optimal term clustering mapping clu t  : {t1 t1 ... tl} 뫸 {t 1 t 1 ... t k}  where k 뫞 l  l is the total number of words in all the documents  and k is the number of clusters.
1.	methodology
모we now describe a novel algorithm which can handle singledocument segmentation  shared topic detection  and multidocument segmentation and alignment based on mi or wmi. 1 mutual information
모mi i x;y   is a quantity to measure the amount of information which is contained in two or more random variables  1  1 . for the case of two random variables  we have
	 	 1 
obviously  when random variables x and y are independent  i x;y   = 1. thus  intuitively  the value of mi depends on how random variables are dependent on each other. the optimal co-clustering is the mapping clux : x 뫸 x  and cluy : y 뫸 y  that minimizes the loss: i x;y     i x ;y    which is equal to maximizing i x ;y  . this is the criterion of mi for clustering.
모in the case of topic segmentation  the two random variables are the term variable t and the segment variable s  and each sample is an occurrence of a term t = t in a particular segment s = s. i t;s  is used to measure how dependent t and s are. however  i t;s  cannot be computed for documents before segmentation  since we do not have a set of s due to the fact that sentences of document d  si 뫍 sd  is not aligned with other documents. thus  instead of minimizing the loss of mi  we can maximize mi after topic segmentation  computed as:
	 	 1 
where p t   s   are estimated by the term frequency tf of term cluster t  and segment  s in the training set d. note that here a segment  s includes sentences about the the same topic among all documents. the optimal solution is the mapping
  and	  which
maximizes i t ;s  .
1	weighted mutual information
모in topic segmentation and alignment of multiple documents  if p d s t    is known  based on the marginal distributions p d|t  and p s |t  for each term t 뫍 t  we can categorize terms into four types in the data set:
  common stop words are common both along the dimensions of documents and segments.
  document-dependent stop words that depends on the personal writing style are common only along the dimension of segments for some documents.
  cue words are the most important elements for segmentation. they are common along the dimension of documents only for the same segment  and they are not common along the dimensions of segments.
  noisy words are other words which are not common along both dimensions.
entropy based on p d|t  and p s |t  can be used to identify different types of terms. to reinforce the contribution of cue words in the mi computation  and simultaneously reduce the effect of the other three types of words  similar as the idea of the tf-idf weight   we use entropies of each term along the dimensions of document d and segment s   i.e. ed t   and es  t    to compute the weight. a cue word usually has a large value of ed t   but a small value of es  t  . we introduce term weights  or term cluster weights 

where 
  and a   1 and b   1 are
powers to adjust term weights. usually a = 1 and b = 1 as default  and    and    are used to normalize the entropy values. term cluster weights are used to adjust p t   s   
	 	 1 
and
	 	 1 
where pw t   and pw s   are marginal distributions of pw t   s  . however  since we do not know either the term weights or p d s t     we need to estimate them  but wt  depends on p s |t  and s   while s  and p s |t  also depend on wt  that is still unknown. thus  an iterative algorithm is required to estimate term weights wt  and find the best segmentation and alignment to optimize the objective function iw concurrently. after a document is segmented into sentences
input:
joint probability distribution p d sd t   number of text segments p 뫍 {1 ... max sd }  number of term clusters k 뫍 {1 ... l}  if k = l  no term co-clustering required   and weight type w 뫍 {1}  indicating to use i or iw  respectively.
output:
mapping clu  seg  ali  and term weights wt .
initialization:
1. i = 1. initialize  and	; initialize
using equation  1  if w = 1;
stage 1:
1. if |d| = 1  k = l  and w = 1  check all sequential segmentations of d into p segments and find the best one
segd s  = argmaxs i t ;s   
and return segd; otherwise  if w = 1 and k = l  go to 1;
stage 1:
1 if k   l  for each term t  find the best cluster t as
clu i+1  t  = argmaxt i t ;s  i  
based on seg i  and ali i ;
1 for each d  check all sequential segmentations of d into p
segments with mapping	  and find the best one

based on clu i+1  t  if k   l or clu 1  t  if k = l;
1 i + +. if clu  seg  or ali changed  go to 1; otherwise  if w = 1  return clu i   seg i   and ali i ; else j = 1  go to 1;
stage 1:
1 update	based on seg i+j   ali i+j   and clu i 
using equation  1 ;
1 for each d  check all sequential segmentations of d into p
segments with mapping	  and find the best one
	  + +1 	  + +1 
	alid	 segd	 s   = argmaxs iw t  i ;s  
based on;
1 j + +. if iw t ;s   changes  go to step 1; otherwise  stop and return clu i   seg i+j   ali i+j   and;figure 1: algorithm: topic segmentation and alignment based on mi or wmi.
and each sentence is segmented into words  each word is stemmed. then the joint probability distribution p d sd t  can be estimated. finally  this distribution can be used to compute mi in our algorithm.
1	iterative greedy algorithm
our goal is to maximize the objective function  i t ;s   or
iw t ;s    which can measure the dependence of term occurrences in different segments. generally  first we do not know the estimate term weights  which depend on the optimal topic segmentation and alignment  and term clusters. moreover  this problem is np-hard   even though if we know the term weights. thus  an iterative greedy algorithm is desired to find the best solution  even though probably only local maxima are reached. we present the iterative greedy algorithm in figure 1 to find a local maximum of i t ;s   or
iw t ;s   with simultaneous term weight estimation. this algorithm can is iterative and greedy for multi-document cases or single-document cases with term weight estimation and/or term co-clustering. otherwise  since it is just a one step algorithm to solve the task of single-document segmentation  1  1  1   the global maximum of mi is guaranteed. we will show later that term co-clustering reduces the accuracy of the results and is not necessary  and for singledocument segmentation  term weights are also not required.
1.1	initialization
모in step 1  the initial term clustering clut and topic segmentation and alignment segd and alid are important to avoid local maxima and reduce the number of iterations. first  a good guess of term weights can be made by using the distributions of term frequency along sentences for each document and averaging them to get the initial values of wt :
	 	 1 
where
 
모모모모모모모| t|	p s|t  d뫍dt	s뫍sd where dt is the set of documents which contain term t. then  for the initial segmentation seg 1   we can simply segment documents equally by sentences. or we can find the optimal segmentation just for each document d which maximizes the wmi     where
. for the initial alignment ali 1   we can first assume that the order of segments for each d is the same. for the initial term clustering clu 1   first cluster labels can be set randomly  and after the first time of step 1  a good initial term clustering is obtained.
1.1	different cases
모after initialization  there are three stages for different cases. totally there are eight cases  |d| = 1 or |d|   1  k = l or k   l  w = 1 or w = 1. single document segmentation without term clustering and term weight estimation  |d| = 1 k = l w = 1  only requires stage 1  step 1 . if term clustering is required  k   l   stage 1  step 1  1  and 1  is executed iteratively. if term weight estimation is required  w = 1   stage 1  step 1  1  and 1  is executed iteratively. if both are required  k   l w = 1   stage 1 and 1 run one after the other. for multi-document segmentation without term clustering and term weight estimation  |d|   1 k = l w = 1   only iteration of step 1 and 1 are required.
모at stage 1  the global maximum can be found based on i t ;s   using dynamic programming in section 1. simultaneously finding a good term clustering and estimated term weights is impossible  since when moving a term to a new term cluster to maximize iw t ;s    we do not know that the weight of this term should be the one of the new cluster or the old cluster. thus  we first do term clustering at stage 1  and then estimate term weights at stage 1.
모at stage 1  step 1 is to find the best term clustering and step 1 is to find the best segmentation. this cycle is repeated to find a local maximum based on mi i until it converges. the two steps are:  1  based on current term clustering clut   for each document d  the algorithm segments all the sentences sd into p segments sequentially  some segments may be empty   and put them into the p segments s  of the whole training set d  all possible cases of different segmentation segd and alignment alid are checked  to find the optimal case  and  1  based on the current segmentation and alignment  for each term t  the algorithm finds the best term cluster of t based on the current segmentation segd and alignment alid. after finding a good term clustering  term weights are estimated if w = 1.
모at stage 1  similar as stage 1  step 1 is term weight re-estimation and step 1 is to find a better segmentation. they are repeated to find a local maximum based on wmi iw until it converges. however  if the term clustering in stage 1 is not accurate  then the term weight estimation at stage 1 may have a bad result. finally  at step 1  this algorithm converges and return the output. this algorithm can handle both single-document and multi-document segmentation. it also can detect shared topics among documents by checking the proportion of overlapped sentences on the same topics  as described in sec 1.
1	algorithm optimization
모in many previous works on segmentation  dynamic programming is a technique used to maximize the objective function. similarly  at step 1  1  and 1 of our algorithm  we can use dynamic programming. for stage 1  using dynamic programming can still find the global optimum  but for stage 1 and stage 1  we can only find the optimum for each step of topic segmentation and alignment of a document. here we only show the dynamic programming for step 1 using wmi  step 1 and 1 are similar but they can use either i or iw . there are two cases that are not shown in the algorithm in figure 1:  a  single-document segmentation or multi-document segmentation with the same sequential order of segments  where alignment is not required  and  b  multi-document segmentation with different sequential orders of segments  where alignment is necessary. the alignment mapping function of the former case is simply just
  while for the latter one's alignment mapping function and j may be different. the computational steps for the two cases are listed below:
case 1  no alignment :
for each document d:
모 1  compute pw t    partial pw t   s   and partial pw s   without counting sentences from d. then put sentences from i to j into part k  and compute partial wmi
 
where alid si si+1 ... sj  = k  k 뫍 {1 ... p}  1 뫞 i 뫞 j 뫞 nd  and segd sq  = s k for all i 뫞 q 뫞 j.
모 1  let m sm 1  = piw t ;  s1 s1 s1 ... sm  . then
m sm l  = maxi m si 1 l   1  + piw t ;  sl si ... sm    
where 1 뫞 m 뫞 nd  1   l   p  1 뫞 i 뫞 m + 1  and when i   m  no sentences are put into  sk when compute piw
 note piw t ;  s si ... sm   = 1 for single-document segmentation .
모 1  finally m snd p  = maxi m si 1 p   1 +
모piw t ;  sp si ... snd     where 1 뫞 i 뫞 nd+1. the optimal iw is found and the corresponding segmentation is the best.
case 1  alignment required :
for each document d:
모 1  compute pw t    partial pw t   s    and partial pw s    and piw t ;  sk si si+1 ... sj   similarly as case 1.
모 1  let m sm 1 k  = piw t ;  sk s1 s1 ... sm    where k 뫍 {1 ... p}. then m sm l kl  = maxi j m si 1 l    
l
where 1 뫞 m 뫞 nd  1   l   p  1 뫞 i 뫞 m + 1  kl 뫍
set p l   which is the set of all  combinations of
l segments chosen from all p segments  j 뫍 kl  the set of l segments chosen from all p segments  and kl/j is the combination of l   1 segments in kl except segment j.
 1  finally  m snd p kp  = maxi j m si 1 p   1 kp/j 
 
모where kp is just the combination of all p segments and 1 뫞 i 뫞 nd + 1  which is the optimal iw and the corresponding segmentation is the best.
모the steps of case 1 and 1 are similar  except in case 1  alignment is considered in addition to segmentation. first  basic items of probability for computing iw are computed excluding doc d  and then partial wmi by putting every possible sequential segment  including empty segment  of d into every segment of the set. second  the optimal sum of piw for l segments and the leftmost m sentences  m sm l   is found. finally  the maximal wmi is found among different sums of m sm p   1  and piw for segment p.
1.	experiments
모in this section  single-document segmentation  shared topic detection  and multi-document segmentation will be tested. different hyper parameters of our method are studied. for convenience  we refer to the method using i as mik if w = 1  and iw as wmik if w = 1 or as = 1  where k is the number of term clusters  and if k = l  where l is the total number of terms  then no term clustering is required  i.e. mil and wmil. 1 single-document segmentation
1.1	test data and evaluation
모the first data set we tested is a synthetic one used in previous research  1  1  1  and many other papers. it has 1 samples. each is a concatenation of ten segments. each segment is the first n sentence selected randomly from the brown corpus  which is supposed to have a different topic from each other. currently  the best results on this data set is achieved by ji et.al. . to compare the performance of our methods  the criterion used widely in previous research is applied  instead of the unbiased criterion introduced in . it chooses a pair of words randomly. if they are in different segments  different  for the real segmentation  real   but predicted  pred  as in the same segment  it is a miss. if they are in the same segment  same   but predicted as in different segments  it is a false alarm. thus  the error rate is computed using the following equation:
|	|
1.1	experiment results
모we tested the case when the number of segments is known. table 1 shows the results of our methods with different hyper parameter values and three previous approaches  c1  u1  and addp1  on this data set when the segment number is known. in wmi for single-document segmentation  the term weights are computed as follows: wt  =
  . for this case  our methods mil
and wmil both outperform all the previous approaches. we compared our methods with addp1using one-sample one-sided t-test and p-values are shown in table 1. from the p-values  we can see that mostly the differences are very table 1: average error rates of single-document segmentation given segment numbers known
range of n1111sample size11c1%1%1%1%u1%1%1%1%addp1.1%1%1%1%mil1%1%1%1%wmil1%1%1%1%mi1.1%1%1%1%table 1: single-document segmentation: p-values of t-test on error rates
range of n1111addp1  mil1111addp1  wmil1111mil  wmil1111significant. we also compare the error rates between our two methods using two-sample two-sided t-test to check the hypothesis that they are equal. we cannot reject the hypothesis that they are equal  so the difference are not significant  even though all the error rates for mil are smaller than wmil. however  we can conclude that term weights contribute little in single-document segmentation. the results also show that mi using term co-clustering  k = 1  decreases the performance. we tested different number of term clusters  and found that the performance becomes better when the cluster number increases to reach l. wmik l has similar results that we did not show in the table.
모as mentioned before  using mi may be inconsistent on optimal boundaries given different numbers of segments. this situation occurs especially when the similarities among segments are quite different  i.e. some transitions are very obvious  while others are not. this is because usually a document is a hierarchical structure instead of only a sequential structure. when the segments are not at the same level  this situation may occur. thus  a hierarchical topic segmentation approach is desired  and the structure highly depends on the number of segments for each internal node and the stop criteria of splitting. for this data set of singledocument segmentation  since it is just a synthetic set  which is just a concatenation of several segments about different topics  it is reasonable that approaches simply based on term frequency have a good performance. usually for the tasks of segmenting coherent documents for sub-topics  the effectiveness decreases much.
1	shared topic detection
1.1	test data and evaluation
모the second data set contains 1 news articles from google news. there are eight topics and each has 1 articles. we randomly split the set into subsets with different document numbers and each subset has all eight topics. we compare our approach mil and wmil with lda . lda treats a document in the data set as a bag of words  finds its distribution on topics  and its major topic. mil and wmil views each sentence as a bag of words and tag it with a topic label. then for each pair of documents  lda determines if they are on the same topic  while mil and table 1: shared topic detection: average error rates for different numbers of documents in each subset
#doc11lda1%1%1%1%mil 붿 = 11%1%1%1%wmil 붿 = 11%1%1%1%wmil check whether the proportion overlapped sentences on the same topic is larger than the adjustable threshold 붿.
that is  in mil and wmil  for a pair of documents 
  where
sd is the set of sentences of   and |sd| is the number of sentences of d  then d and have the shared topic.
모for a pair of documents selected randomly  the error rate is computed using the following equation: p err|real pred  = p miss|real pred same p same|real  +p falsealarm|real pred diff p diff|real   where a miss means if they have the same topic  same  for the real case  real   but predicted  pred  as on the same topic. if they are on different topics  diff   but predicted as on the same topic  it is a false alarm.
1.1	experiment results
모the results are shown in table 1. if most documents have different topics  in wmil  the estimation of term weights in equation  1  is not correct. thus  wmil is not expected to have a better performance than mil  when most documents have different topics. when there are fewer documents in a subset with the same number of topics  more documents have different topics  so wmil is more worse than mil. we can see that for most cases mil has a better  or at least similar  performance than lda. after shared topic detection  multi-document segmentation of documents with the shared topics is able to be executed.
1	multi-document segmentation
1.1	test data and evaluation
모for multi-document segmentation and alignment  our goal is to identify these segments about the same topic among multiple similar documents with shared topics. using iw is expected to perform better than i  since without term weights the result is affected seriously by document-dependent stop words and noisy words which depends on the personal writing style. it is more likely to treat the same segments of different documents as different segments under the effect of document-dependent stop words and noisy words. term weights can reduce the effect of document-dependent stop words and noisy words by giving cue terms more weights.
모the data set for multi-document segmentation and alignment has 1 samples and 1 sentences totally. each is the introduction part of a lab report selected from the course of biol 1w  pennsylvania state university. each sample has two segments  introduction of plant hormones and the content in the lab. the length range of samples is from two to 1 sentences. some samples only have one part and some have a reverse order the these two segments. it is not hard to identify the boundary between two segments for human. we labelled each sentence manually for evaluation. the criterion of evaluation is just using the proportion of the number of sentences with wrong predicted segment labels in the total number of sentences in the whole training table 1: average error rates of multi-document segmentation given segment numbers known
#docmilwmilkmikwmik1.1%1%1.1%1%1.1%1%1.1%1%1.1%1%1.1%1%1.1%1%1.1%1%1.1%1%1.1%1%1.1%1%1.1%1%1.1%1%1.1%1%1.1%1%1.1%1%table 1: multi-document segmentation: p-values of
t-test on error rates for mil and wmil
#doc111p-value111111.
모in order to show the benefits of multi-document segmentation and alignment  we compared our method with different parameters on different partitions of the same training set. except the cases that the number of documents is 1 and one  they are special cases of using the whole set and the pure single-document segmentation   we randomly divided the training set into m partitions  and each has 1  1  1  1  1  and 1 document samples. then we applied our methods on each partition and calculated the error rate of the whole training set. each case was repeated for 1 times for computing the average error rates. for different partitions of the training set  different k values are used  since the number of terms increases when the document number in each partition increases.
1.1	experiment results
모from the experiment results in table 1  we can see the following observations:  1  when the number of documents increases  all methods have better performances. only from one to two documents  mil has decrease a little. we can observe this from figure 1 at the point of document number = 1. most curves even have the worst results at this point. there are two reasons. first  because samples vote for the best multi-document segmentation and alignment  but if only two documents are compared with each other  the one with missing segments or a totally different sequence will affect the correct segmentation and alignment of the other. second  as noted at the beginning of this section  if two documents have more document-dependent stop words or noisy words than cue words  then the algorithm may view them as two different segments and the other segment is missing. generally  we can only expect a better performance when the number of documents is larger than the number of segments.  1  except single-document segmentation  wmil is always better than mil  and when the number of documents is reaching one or increases to a very large number  their performances become closer. table 1 shows p-values of twosample one-sided t-test between mil and wmil. we also can see this trend from p-values. when document number = 1  we reached the smallest p-value and the largest difference between error rates of mil and wmil. for single-document table 1: multi-document segmentation: average error rate for document number = 1 in each subset with different number of term clusters
#cluster11lmik1%1%1%1%1%segmentation  wmil is even a little bit worse than mil  which is similar as the results of the single-document segmentation on the first data set. the reason is that for singledocument segmentation  we cannot estimate term weights accurately  since multiple documents are unavailable.  1  using term clustering usually gets worse results than mil and wmil. 1  using term clustering in wmik is even worse than in mik  since in wmik term clusters are found first using i before using iw. if the term clusters are not correct  then the term weights are estimated worse  which may mislead the algorithm to reach even worse results. from the results we also found that in multi-document segmentation and alignment  most documents with missing segments and a reverse order are identified correctly.
모table 1 illustrates the experiment results for the case of 1 partitions  each has five document samples  of the training set and topic segmentation and alignment using mik with different numbers of term clusters k. notice that when the number of term clusters increases  the error rate becomes smaller. without term clustering  we have the best result. we did not show results for wmik with term clustering  but the results are similar.
1	1	1	1 document number
figure 1: error rates for different hyper parameters of term weights.1.1.1.1.1 normalized document entropy
figure 1: term weights learned from the whole training set.모we also tested wmil with different hyper parameters of a and b to adjust term weights. the results are presented in figure 1. it was shown that the default case wmil : a = 1 b = 1 gave the best results for different partitions of the training set. we can see the trend that when the document number is very small or large  the difference between mil : a = 1 b = 1 and wmil : a = 1 b = 1 becomes quite small. when the document number is not large  about from 1 to 1   all the cases using term weights have better performances than mil : a = 1 b = 1 without term weights  but when the document number becomes larger  the cases wmil : a = 1 b = 1 and wmil : a = 1 b = 1 become worse than mil : a = 1 b = 1. when the document number becomes very large  they are even worse than cases with small document numbers. this means that a proper way to estimate term weights for the criterion of wmi is very important. figure 1 shows the term weights learned from the whole training set. four types of words are categorized roughly even though the transition among them are subtle. figure 1 illustrates the change in  weighted  mutual information for mil and wmil. as expected  mutual information for mil increases monotonically with the number of steps  while wmil does not. finally  mil and wmil are scalable  with computational complexity shown in figure 1. one advantage for our approach based on mi is that removing stop words is not required. another important advantage is that there are no necessary hyper parameters to adjust. in single-document segmentation  the performance based on mi is even better for that based on wmi  so no extra hyper parameter is required. in multi-document segmentation  we show in the experiment  a = 1 and b = 1 is the best. our method gives more weights to cue terms. however  usually cue terms or sentences appear at the beginning of a segment  while the end of the segment may be 1
모

1	1
1	1	1	1 number of steps
figure 1: change in  weighted  mi for mil and wmil.1	1	1	1 document number
figure 1: time to converge for mil and wmil.모
much noisy. one possible solution is giving more weights to terms at the beginning of each segment. moreover  when the length of segments are quite different  long segments have much higher term frequencies  so they may dominate the segmentation boundaries. normalization of term frequencies versus the segment length may be useful.
1.	conclusions and future work
모we proposed a novel method for multi-document topic segmentation and alignment based on weighted mutual information  which can also handle single-document cases. we used dynamic programming to optimize our algorithm. our approach outperforms all the previous methods on singledocument cases. moreover  we also showed that doing segmentation among multiple documents can improve the performance tremendously. our results also illustrated that using weighted mutual information can utilize the information of multiple documents to reach a better performance.
모we only tested our method on limited data sets. more data sets especially complicated ones should be tested. more previous methods should be compared with. moreover  natural segmentations like paragraphs are hints that can be used to find the optimal boundaries. supervised learning also can be considered.
1.	acknowledgments
모the authors want to thank xiang ji  and prof. j. scott payne for their help.
