in this talk  i will describe a number of machine learning paradigms that are relevant to utility-based data mining  and review some key techniques and results in each.
categories and subject descriptors
i.1  artificial intelligence : learning - induction; h.1  database management : applications - data mining
general terms
algorithms
keywords
machine learning  cost-sensitive learning  reinforcement learning  active learning  data mining
there are a number of ways to introduce utility in machine learning  depending on the application scenario. one natural way to introduce utility is in terms of the cost assigned to misclassification errors  and this is the so-called cost sensitive learning . another way in which utility can be introduced is by considering the cost of data acquisition. this aspect has been rigorously formulated as economic machine learning by provost  c.f. .  one paradigm of machine learning that pays special attention to the cost of data acquisition  in addition to the predictive quality of the obtained hypotheses  is active/query learning . the standard active learning paradigm assumes  in effect  that acquiring each example is equally costly  but it readily admits generalizations to accout for general cost structure. another machine

 permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  or republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. ubdm '1   august 1  1  chicago  illinois  usa. copyright 1 acm 1-1/1 ...$1.
learning paradigm  which we might collectively refer to as active on-line learning addresses the issue of optimizing the combination  and trade-off  of losses incurred during data acquisition  and those associated with the predictive quality of the final hypothesis. some examples of learning paradigms that fall within this general class include the classic bandit problem  and its generalizations and associative reinforcement learning  1  1 . theories have been developed on these learning paradigms  which provide learning strategies that come with theoretical guarantee on the total losses  inclusive of the two types of losses. finally  a comprehensive paradigm of machine learning  which includes all of the ones mentioned so far as special cases  is reinforcement learning. indeed  some authors have embedded instances of utilitybased data mining problems within the mdp framework  e.g.  . while the mdp formulation is the most general  it does not necessarily follow that it will be the most effective in practice. when the problem at hand falls into one of the special cases discussed  the theory and methodology in that special case may be the most effective. i hope to draw some examples of real world applications  for which some of these special cases have indeed proved to be satisfactory.
