query length in best-match information retrieval  ir  systems is well known to be positively related to effectiveness in the ir task  when measured in experimental  non-interactive environments. however  in operational  interactive ir systems  query length is quite typically very short  on the order of two to three words. we report on a study which tested the effectiveness of a particular query elicitation technique in increasing initial searcher query length  and which tested the effectiveness of queries elicited using this technique  and the relationship in general between query length and search effectiveness in interactive ir. results show that the specific technique results in longer queries than a standard query elicitation technique  that this technique is indeed usable  that the technique results in increased user satisfaction with the search  and that query length is positively correlated with user satisfaction with the search. 
categories and subject descriptors 
h.1  information storage and retrieval : information search and retrieval - query formulation  search process 
general terms keywords 
performance  design  experimentation  human factors. 
interactive 	information 	retrieval  	query 	length  	query effectiveness 
1. introduction 
it is well understood and documented that  in best-match information retrieval  ir  systems  increased query length leads to increased performance  as measured by recall and precision in batch-mode experimental ir systems  and it is well documented that query length in typical operational  interactive ir systems  in particular web search engines  whether best- or exact-match  is rather short  typically between two and three words long  e.g. jansen  spink & saracevic  1 . this evident mismatch has led to a significant research effort at increasing query length. the most popular approach has been to automatically expand short queries without user intervention by various techniques  most often by some type of pseudo-relevance feedback  e.g.  
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  or republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
sigir'1  july 1-august 1  1  toronto  canada.  
copyright 1 acm 1-1/1...$1.  
 
walker  et al.  1   sometimes by thesaural or other type expansion  e.g.  milic-frayling  et al.  1; xu & croft  1 . such studies have shown that these sorts of query expansion lead to increased performance  again as measured in experimental  batch-mode evaluation. there have also been a few attempts at increasing query length by encouraging searchers to enter longer queries in the first instance  e.g. karlgren & franz뺝n  1; belkin  et al.  1 . although such studies have indicated that there seem to be relatively simple techniques that can encourage longer queries  they have not systematically investigated whether these queries actually result in better performance in interactive ir. thus  the current situation is that  although there is evidence that longer queries perform better in non-interactive best-match ir systems  we can only infer that automatically-enhanced queries may perform better in interactive ir  and we have almost no evidence that longer queries obtained through searcher encouragement will lead to better performance in interactive ir. in this paper  we report on a study which explicitly investigated one technique designed to elicit longer than usual queries from searchers  and the effect of the technique  and of query length in general  on performance in interactive ir. 
belkin  et al.  1  compared two query-elicitation modes  a query-entry line and a scrollable query-entry box  to determine whether the box mode  which allowed searchers to enter and see a complete query of five 1 character-long lines at a time  would result in longer queries than the line mode  which allowed searchers to see 1 characters of a query . they also compared two query types: queries constructed as lists of key-words and/or phrases  versus queries constructed as full sentences or questions.  they found that the box mode led to somewhat longer queries  and that the full sentence or question type led to significantly longer queries. although their study was not designed explicitly to evaluate the effect of query length on performance  they did find a consistent relationship between query length and one measure of performance in the task  completeness of answer. this was  however  only a descriptive finding  and not inferential. 
based on the results of belkin  et al.  1   we designed a study within the trec 1 interactive track  cf. hersh & over  1  to explicitly investigate the effect of method of query elicitation on query length  and the effect of query length on various measures of interactive ir performance. in particular  with respect to query length  we investigated two major research questions: 
rq1: what can make searchers' query length in interactive ir longer  and will searchers find such techniques acceptable and usable  
within this research question  we posed the following hypothesis: 
h1: a search interface which asks searchers to describe their information problems at length will lead to longer queries than one which asks searchers to simply input a query as a list of words or phrases. 
this hypothesis was based on the results of belkin  et al.  1   on a survey of query elicitation techniques used in digital reference situations  and on the problem statement elicitation techniques described in belkin  oddy & brooks  1 .  from the data and ideas in these sources  we designed a query elicitation mode which asked people to describe their information problems  rather than to enter a query. this hypothesis was tested by comparing query length in this mode  with query length in a default  list of keywords and/or phrases elicitation mode. 
we investigated the usability of the information problem elicitation mode through one  objective  measure  number of iterations  and one  subjective  measure  ease of starting a search. 
furthermore  we investigated the effect of several factors which might influence query length. one was type of information task that the searcher was engaged in  based on results such as those reported by bystr m and j rvelin  1 ; another was the type of topic of the search; a third was familiarity of the searcher with the topic and task  based on results such as those reported by kelly and cool  1 ; and the fourth was perceived difficulty of the search. 
rq1: 	does query length affect any measures of performance or effectiveness in the search task  
within this research question we posed two hypotheses: 
h1: a system which encourages long queries will lead to better performance in the search task than one which does not. 
with this hypothesis  we were explicitly concerned with testing whether the information problem elicitation interface  given that it did encourage long queries  led to better performance than one which elicited keyword and/or phrase queries. performance was measured by an  objective  measure  correctness of answer for the search task  and a  subjective  measure  searcher's satisfaction with the search results. in addition  number of query iterations per search was considered an indicator of search effectiveness. 
h1: query length will be positively correlated with performance in the search task. 
with this hypothesis  we were concerned with determining whether query length  regardless of query elicitation mode  affected performance in the search task. the same measures were used to test h1 as h1. 
1. methods 
1 study design 
as this study was conducted within the trec 1 interactive track  we followed that track's guidelines.1 these stipulated that all participants in the track would test their systems in a comparative mode  using a common set of eight search topics  classified into two search task types  and four search topic types  examples of each task and topic type are in appendix a . the general study design was within subject  with each subject searching a block of topics in one of two systems  and then a block in the other system. each participating site was sent a pseudo-randomly generated list of 1 topic-block/system-order combinations by the track organizers  which were to be applied to the minimum number of 1 subjects. this list guaranteed balance between system order and topic block order. 
all participants in the track used the identical database  the trec 1 web track database  which was a crawl of the .gov domain  see craswell & hawking  1 for a complete description   and the identical search engine  panoptic.1  although panoptic is basically a best-match search engine  which is the context in which we wished to test query length  for queries of four or fewer words  it changes to a coordinationlevel ranking algorithm  in which documents containing all n query terms are ranked before those containing n-1  and so on  disregarding the effect of term weights since this algorithm still results in a ranking close to that of a best-match system  we decided that query length could be investigated using panoptic. 
our study investigated  in addition to query entry mode  method of display of results. in this paper  we do not report on the latter aspect. but since it affected our overall design  we indicate here how both aspects were studied within the same design. we studied these two aspects by running two complete sets of the basic interactive track design  in each of which the withinsubject variable was display of results. we tested the effect of query elicitation mode with a between-subjects design  using a different mode for each of the two iterations of the basic study. thus  query elicitation mode was tested with 1 subjects  1 in each mode  cf.  belkin  et al.  1  for explicit details of the final design . 
our baseline query elicitation mode  called nqe  consisted of a scrollable query entry box of five 1-character lines  with the label above the box:  query terms . subjects in this mode were instructed  during the introductory tutorial for this interface  to enter their queries as a list of key-words or phrases. our experimental query elicitation mode  called qe  consisted of an identical box  but with the label above it saying:  information problem description  the more you say  the better the results are likely to be  . in the tutorial for this interface  subjects were told that they could enter their queries as multiple full sentences or questions.  
all searches were performed using a sun ultrasparc-iii  1mhz  with 1m memory and a 1 inch monitor. we wrote two basic interfaces as applications  connecting to panoptic. they were implemented using swing of java 1 sdk  version 1. screen shots are in appendix b. 
1  conduct of the study 
all searching was done at the experimental site. when subjects arrived  they were asked to sign an informed consent form.1 they then completed a background questionnaire  eliciting various demographic data and data concerning searching experience. next  the experimenter gave a demonstration of the first interface that the subjects would use  which was based on an example topic of the sort that the subjects would be searching on. the subjects were then given a paper form with a description of the first topic that they were to search on  and questions about whether they thought they knew the answer to the topic's question  and their confidence in that knowledge  which they answered at that time. then  the subjects returned to the computer  were instructed that they would have up to ten minutes to complete the search  that they were to save those documents  pages  which helped them to answer the topic's question  and were asked to think aloud during the search. the computer monitor was videotaped during all searches  and the thinking aloud was recorded on the videotape. when the subjects thought they had answered the question  or when they had run out of time  the system was stopped  and the subjects were asked to fill out a questionnaire with respect to their satisfaction with the results of the search  ease of starting the search  and other characteristics of the search on that particular topic. this procedure was repeated for the next three topics. after the first four topics  subjects were asked to complete a questionnaire regarding their experience searching with that particular interface. they were then given a demonstration of the second interface that they were to use  and then the same procedure was followed for the next four topics. after the second post-system questionnaire  subjects were engaged in a semi-structured exit interview  which was tape recorded. this questionnaire elicited information about common features of the two interfaces  and also compared the two interfaces. the entire procedure was typically finished in about two hours. all of the data collection instruments  and the scripts for the demonstrations  are available at http://scils.rutgers.edu/mongrel. 
1 measures and definitions 
we used the measures and variables defined in table 1 to investigate the effect of the qe and nqe conditions  and of query length in general. 
table 1. definition of measures and variables 
measure/variable definition iteration each instance of issuing a query during a search on a single topic  number of iterations = number of queries in a search  mean query length the average of the length in words of all queries in a search  1-word query + 1word query + 1-word query = mql of 1  correctness of result whether a search resulted in saved pages which completely and correctly answered the search topic 1 subjects 
we had 1 volunteer subjects who were recruited largely from the student population at  deleted for reviewing purposes . some were given credit for participating in the experiment and writing a brief description of their experience. twenty-six  1%  were female and 1  1%  male. our subjects were most likely  1%  to be between 1 years of age  while their ages ranged overall from 1 to 1% had completed a masters degree  and 1% expected to complete one. all subjects were required to have some experience using web search engines. our subjects reported having an average of 1 years of searching experience. using a 1 point scale to measure experience  in which 1=novice and 1=expert  the self-assessed level of expertise with computers was  on average  1. 
1. results 
1 query length 
1.1 qe and query length 
the first research question that we explored considered a technique for making searchers' query length in interactive ir longer  and if searchers would find such a technique usable. to test hypothesis 1  we compared the mean query length per search in the qe mode to that of the nqe mode.  results from a t-test indicate that searchers using the qe interface entered significantly longer queries  m=1; sd=1  than those using nqe interface  m=1; sd=1   t 1  = -1  p .1. 1.1 usability of qe 
to explore the usability of qe  we examined subjects' response to a post-search question and the mean number of iterations per search. we asked the subjects how easy it was to get started on the search on a 1 point scale to measure the  subjective  usability of nqe and qe. results from a t-test indicate that there was no significant difference in experienced difficulty between nqe 1  1  and qe 1  1 .  
the mean number of iterations per search  and standard deviation  for qe was 1  1 ; for nqe  1  1 . results from a t-test indicate that subjects using qe had significantly fewer iterations than subjects using nqe  t 1  = 1  p .1. 
we also considered query length at each number of iterations. table 1 displays mean query length at each number of iterations  and the numbers of searches with that number of iterations  for both qe and nqe. from these data  we see that  although mean query length is consistently longer for qe than nqe at each iteration number  the number of searches with n iterations decreases much more rapidly for qe than for nqe  as does query length up to iteration 1. 
table 1. mean query length  standard deviation  at each iteration number. 
iteration mean query length  sd  n nqe qe nqe qe nqe qe 1 1 1  1  1  1  1 1 1 1 1  1  1  1  1 1 1 1 1  1  1  1  1 1 1 1 1  1  1  1  1 1 1 1 1  1  1  1  1 1 1 1 1  1  1  1  1 1 1 1 1  1  1  1  1 1 1  1  1   1  totals 1  1  1  1  1 1  
 
1.1 factors affecting query length 
as mentioned in section 1  the information problems used in our study were classified along two dimensions: task type and topic type. we wished to see whether query length varied according to these types. table 1 displays the mean query length and standard deviations according to task type and topic type. there are no significant differences between these means.  
table 1. mean query length for task type and topic type. 
 mean standard deviation task type   website 1 1 quantity 1 1 topic type   government regulation 1 1 health 1 1 project 1 1 travel 1 1 subjects' knowledge of the information problems was determined by questions from the pre- and post-search questionnaires. topic familiarity was assessed by a pre-search questionnaire which asked subjects to indicate their familiarity with a topic on a 1-point scale  spanning from not at all  1  to somewhat  1  to extremely  1 . perceived difficulty of the information problem was assessed by two post-search questions which asked subjects to indicate how easy it was to do a search on the topic and if they had enough time to do an effective search. subjects responded to these two questions using 1-points scales identical to the familiarity scale. because of low numbers of observed values in some cells  we grouped subject responses to each of these three questions into three groups: low  1   medium  1  and high  1 .  
table 1 displays the means and standard deviations for each of these measures. the difference between groups for familiarity is statistically significant  f 1  1  = 1  p .1  with subjects who are more familiar with the topic of the information problem entering longer queries than those subjects who are less familiar with the topic. for perceived difficulty  there is no significant difference between means for either measure.  
table 1. mean query length  standard deviation  according to topic familiarity and perceived difficulty. 
 groups low medium high familiarity 1  1  1  1  1  1  perceived difficulty    easy to search 1  1  1  1  1  1  enough time 1  1  1  1  1  1   
1 query length and performance 
 
1.1 	qe and performance 
the second research question that we explored asked if query length affects performance. given that searchers entered significantly longer queries in qe than nqe  we compared directly searcher's task performance in each of these systems. 
this was a test of hypothesis 1. for performance  we considered the correctness of searchers' answers to the information problems and searchers' satisfaction with the system. table 1 displays the distributions of correctly and incorrectly answered information problems for qe and nqe. results from a chisquare test demonstrate that there is no significant difference in these distributions.  
table 1. distribution of correctness for qe and nqe. 
 correctness of search total incorrect correct system qe 1 1 1 nqe 1 1 1 total 1 1 1  
satisfaction with a search was assessed by a post-search questionnaire that asked searchers to indicate their satisfaction with the search results on a 1-point scale  spanning from not at all  1  to somewhat  1  to extremely  1 . for satisfaction with search results  searchers were found to be more satisfied with their search results in qe  m=1; sd=1  than nqe  m=1; sd=1   although not significantly so  t 1  = -1  p=.1.  
we further considered mean number of iterations per search as an indirect measure of effectiveness  since fewer query iterations for equivalent results would be a more effective search. as reported earlier  the difference between mean number of iterations in qe  m=1; sd=1  and nqe  m=1; 
sd=1  is statistically significant  t 1  = 1  p .1  with searchers using the nqe interface having significantly more iterations than those using the qe interface. 
1.1 	query length and performance: overall 
to test hypothesis 1  we asked whether mean query length overall was related to better performance  regardless of query elicitation mode. overall  we found no statistically significant difference in mean query length for correct  m=1; sd=1  and incorrect answers  m=1; sd=1 . to explore the differences in mean query length for each level of satisfaction  it was necessary to group the responses in the same way that responses to familiarity and perceived difficulty were grouped  because of the low number of observations in some cells. the means and standard deviations for mean query length and satisfaction group are displayed in table 1. results from an anova indicate that highly satisfied searchers entered significantly longer queries than unsatisfied searchers  f 1  1  = 1  p=.1.   
table 1. mean query length according to satisfaction. 
 satisfaction low medium high mean query length 1  1  1  1  1  1  we then considered the mean query length according to searches with n iterations. table 1 displays these results. here we note that the more iterations there are in a search  with the exception of 1- and 1-iteration searches   the shorter is the average mean query length. that longer mean query length is associated with fewer iterations suggests that similar performance can be accomplished with less effort with longer initial queries. 
table 1. mean query length for searches with n iterations. 
iterations mean query length standard deviation 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1  
1. discussion 
because of the well-known variability associated with differences in topics and types of information problems  we tested to see whether these factors influenced query length. there was no difference in query length according to tasks and topic types used in the trec 1 interactive track; we therefore conclude that the results reported here are general  at least with respect to this limited range of types. however  searchers' familiarity with the topic of the search did  as expected  affect query length  cf. kelly & cool  1 . but since there was no relationship between topic familiarity and the two interface conditions and familiarity was randomly distributed in the subject population  we conclude that this factor does not affect our conclusions.  
hypothesis 1  that query length can be increased by encouragement in the interface  was strongly supported by our results. the qe interface resulted in significantly longer queries  even after stop word removal  over an interface which only asked for a query  even using a box-style query input facility which has been shown to increase query length in and of itself  karlgren & franz뺝n  1 . furthermore  we conclude that the qe interface was more usable than the nqe  because the number of iterations in the qe condition was significantly less than in nqe. we take this to mean that less cognitive effort was required in qe  to reach equivalent performance. also  we saw that the qe condition led to a steeper decline in the number of iterations per search  and in query length  than nqe  supporting the conclusion that qe requires less effort  and therefore is more usable. furthermore  there was no difference in ease of starting a search between qe and nqe  indicating that the relatively unfamiliar qe mode did not negatively impact its usability  as compared to the more familiar key-word mode. 
hypothesis 1  that the qe condition would lead to better performance than nqe  is supported by the strong difference in favor of qe in the searchers' satisfaction with the results of each search. although there is no difference in performance between nqe and qe as measured by correctness of search  hypothesis 1 is also supported by the significantly fewer iterations required to achieve comparable correctness and increased satisfaction with results in qe. that query length decreases more rapidly with number of iterations in qe than in nqe also is supportive of hypothesis 1. 
hypothesis 1  that longer queries lead to increased performance  regardless of query elicitation mode  is supported by the significant relationship between subjects' satisfaction with search results and mean query length  and also by the strong association of mean query length with number of iterations. 
since we can reasonably assume that subjects found the answers for their searches in their last iterations  it seems that longer initial queries led to comparable performance with decreased effort. 
1. conclusions 
this study investigated the effectiveness and usability of a relatively simple interface technique for eliciting longer queries from searchers in a web-based best-match ir system  and of the effectiveness of longer queries in general in this system. our goal was two-fold. we wished to see if it was possible to elicit easily longer than usual queries from searchers; and  we wished to see if such queries were actually useful as input to best-match search engines. the query elicitation technique that was investigated was to have the following statement above a fiveline  1-character  scrollable query entry text box: 
모모모모information problem description  the more you say  the better the results are likely to be  it was compared to the equivalent query entry box that had at the top  simply the words  query terms . 
some things need to be said about how we measured search effectiveness  and our  objective  performance measure  correctness of reply to the search topic. there was no relationship between search query length and this measure  either with respect to query length in general  or with respect to the two query elicitation modes. however  about 1% of the search topics resulted in correct responses  which suggests that most of the topics were easy enough that the measure was not sensitive to differences in query elicitation mode or query length. it is also the case that those searches which resulted in incorrect answers were typically incomplete searches  in whatever query elicitation mode  suggesting that they were difficult enough that the ten minutes allotted for each search was the limiting factor. thus  our major measures of search effectiveness are the searchers' subjective satisfaction with search results  and  the effort expended in completing a search. 
the results of the experiment indicate that:  this technique does indeed result in significantly longer queries than even a somewhat enhanced baseline technique  and is at least as usable  and perhaps more usable  than the baseline technique; 
 the technique results in increased searcher satisfaction with search results  and  objective  performance in the task equivalent to the baseline  but with fewer query iterations; 
 longer queries irrespective of query elicitation mode are significantly associated with increased searcher satisfaction with search results  and longer initial queries lead to equivalent  objective  results with fewer query iterations. 
thus  we conclude that our quite simple interface-based query elicitation technique results in significantly longer  and more useful searcher queries in a web searching task than typical query elicitation  for a best-match information retrieval system. furthermore  we conclude that longer searcher queries result in increased search effectiveness in general  indicating that more words from the searcher describing the person's information problem results in better interactive ir performance. taken together  our results mean that getting longer queries from searchers in a best-match web searching environment is not only possible  but desirable and useful. 
1. acknowledgements 
we wish to thank our colleagues who worked so hard with us in designing  scheduling and running the experiments: amymarie keller  yuelin li and william voon  and our wonderful volunteer subjects. the work reported in this paper was supported in part by nsf grant number iis 1. any opinions  findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the national science foundation  nsf . 
