reverse skyline queries over uncertain databases have many important applications such as sensor data monitoring and business planning. due to the existence of uncertainty in many real-world data  answering reverse skyline queries accurately and efficiently over uncertain data has become increasingly important. in this paper  we model the probabilistic reverse skyline query on uncertain data  in both monochromatic and bichromatic cases  and propose effective pruning methods to reduce the search space of query processing. moreover  efficient query procedures have been presented seamlessly integrating the proposed pruning methods. extensive experiments have demonstrated the efficiency and effectiveness of our proposed approach with various experimental settings.
categories and subject descriptors
h.1  information systems : database management-database applications  spatial databases and gis; h.1  information systems : information storage and retrieval-information search and retrieval  search process
general terms
algorithms  design  experimentation  performance  theory
keywords
uncertain database  monochromatic reverse skyline  bichromatic reverse skyline
1. introduction
모recently  the skyline query has played an increasingly important role in many real applications  such as multi-criteria decision making  market analysis  environmental surveillance and quantitative economics research. given a d-dimensional database d  object p p1 p1 ... pd  dominates object o o1 o1 ... od   if it holds that:
1  pi 뫞 oi for each dimension 1 뫞 i 뫞 d  and 1  pj   oj for at least one dimension 1 뫞 j 뫞 d  where oi and pi are the attributes
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
sigmod'1  june 1  1  vancouver  bc  canada.
copyright 1 acm 1-1-1/1 ...$1.
of o and p  respectively. a traditional skyline  a.k.a static skyline query  retrieves all the objects in the database whose attribute vectors are not dominated by others. for static skylines  once the database is given  the skylines as well as the dominant relationships are fixed. figure 1 a  illustrates an example of static skyline over data collected sensors  where five data points  a 몲 e  represent five
-pairs  respectively.	from the figure 
data point a dominates points d and e  since a has lower temperature and smaller humidity than d and e. similarly  sensor data b also dominates points c and d. since a and b are not dominated by any other points in the space  they are static skyline points .
모in addition to static skyline  dynamic  relative  skyline queries have been proposed  1  1  1   where the attributes of each object are dynamically calculated based on query predicates. specifically  each d-dimensional object p is mapped to a new d-dimensional point  where fi is a dynamic function. in this paper  for the sake of simplicity  we assume that and for a given query point q fi p  = |qi pi|  which are also used by dellis and seeger . note  however  that the proposed approaches still hold for a more general class of functions . we give an example with these assumptions below.

	 a  static skyline	 b  dynamic/reverse skyline
figure 1: 1d sensor examples of skyline
모figure 1 b  illustrates the dynamic skyline in the example of sensor data. assume point b b1 b1  is a query object. for any data point  for instance  a a1 a1   its dynamic attributes are computed from its  absolute  humidity and temperature differences from query object b  that is  |a1 b1| and |a1 b1|  respectively. since we consider the absolute differences  as shown in the figure  we map all the points onto the first quadrant of a new coordinate space with origin b  e.g. mapping and to and   respectively; c and d remain the same since they are already in the first quadrant . the dynamic skyline query is issued to obtain all the sensors whose dynamic attribute vectors are not dominated by others  in that quad-
rant . in our example  sensor data d  q  and c are the dynamic skyline points of b. semantically  these dynamic skylines are close to the query point b for all attributes and better  closer to b  than other non-skyline points along at least one attribute  e.g. temperature or humidity .
모in figure 1 b   q is one of dynamic skyline points of b  and b is called a reverse skyline  of q. specifically  given a query pattern q  a reverse skyline query obtains data objects whose dynamic skyline contains q. as shown in the example  the query pattern q is closer to its reverse skyline b than other sensor data along at least one dimension. the reverse skyline query is very useful for environmental monitoring applications. for example  in an application of monitoring the forest  a number of sensors are deployed in a monitoring area to collect data such as temperature and humidity. assume the query q represents the value thresholds of possible fire disaster on different data attributes. if we find that the number of reverse skylines of q within a monitoring area is greater than an alarm threshold  it indicates that  rather than individual malfunctioned sensor data  many sensing values are in the dangerous state  i.e. either temperature is too high or the air is too dry . in this case  we can take immediate actions to prevent the disaster.
figure 1: monochromatic probabilistic reverse skyline query
모in reality  sensor data often contain noises resulting from environmental factors  transmission delay  or device failures. in the literature of uncertain databases  each sensor data can be considered as an uncertainty region  1  1 . figure 1 shows an example of reverse skyline over uncertain database  in which each
-pair locates in an uncertainty region  shaded region with rectangular shape  with any distribution. thus  the goal of this work is to find out reverse skylines of q among uncertain objects.
모although previous work  has studied the reverse skyline search problem over precise data  they cannot directly handle the uncertain database. the reason is that  each object is now represented by an uncertainty region  instead of a precise point  and the dynamic attributes  with respect to query and data objects  are thus variables rather than exact values. in this paper  we define the reverse skyline query over uncertain database  namely monochromatic probabilistic reverse skyline  mprs   which retrieves all the uncertain objects in a database whose dynamic skylines contain a user-specified query object with a probability greater than or equal to a userspecified threshold. note that  the mprs query has clear advantages that its answers are invariable to scales in different dimensions and it does not require users to specify any heuristic query parameters  which invalidate other query types like nearest neighbor or range query in our examples above.
