models are artifacts used to better understand our world. in the context of mining data to create knowledge  the modeler is often faced with discovering and understanding relationships in data that have no apparent analog in the laws of physical science. much of these data are increasingly abstract; not directly related to the physical  perceivable world. the use of sketches and diagrams as aids in problem solving and as a means of communication is as old as recorded history. can visualization help us not only to discover the patterns and relationships in these data  but also to use newly discovered knowledge to build computational models  
the purpose of this paper is to provide a description of the process of modeling and  based upon theories of cognition  show how visualization can assist in developing and assessing computational models for very large  high dimensional data sets. 
category and subject 
h.1  information systems : user/machine systems-human information processing; h.1  information systems : group and 
organization interfaces-- computer-supported cooperative work; i.1  computing methodologies : model development-- modeling methodologies; i.1  computing methodologies : simulation theory--model classification. 
general terms 
design  human factors  languages  performance. 
keywords 
cognition  representation  visualization  expert modeler. 
1. introduction 
albert einstein once wrote   my particular ability does not lie in mathematical calculation  but rather in visualizing effects  possibilities  and consequences.  . as the domain of human endeavor moves increasingly beyond the three-dimensional spacetime continuum of our visual experience into abstract problems with many variables and large quantities of data  the need for  visualizing effects  possibilities  and consequences  has never been greater. the modeler's task is to explore the data  understand the relationships relevant to the problem at hand  and capture those relationships in a computational model that will match a specific need.  
visualization is not new. throughout recorded history  drawings and other visually oriented representations have been an integral part of man's investigation of the world  and of the historical record as well. from da vinci to einstein to the present  visualization has contributed significantly to invention and discovery.  what is new is the computational and visual display capabilities of desktop computers. data analysts have been quick to embrace computer-based visualization  and effective principles of graphical data representation have been elucidated by tukey  cleveland  mosteller  and tufte  among many others  1  1  1  1  1  1  1 . the modeling community  including decision support and knowledge-based systems practitioners  has perhaps had less success in exploiting visualization to facilitate the development of and to improve the quality of models. the demands of building models in increasingly abstract  data-rich domains increase the potential benefits of successful model visualization. 
just as word-processing software has made almost everyone who wishes to be so a publisher  spreadsheet software has made millions of people potential modelers  1  1 . a surprisingly 

 
 
permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work or  
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not  
 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to  republish  to post on servers  or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
kdd 1  boston  ma usa 
 c  acm 1-1-1/1 ...$1 
large number of these people have  in fact  constructed computational models. while it is easy to create various kinds of presentation graphics from these spreadsheet models  there is very limited support for the actual process of conceiving  building  validating  and communicating the models themselves. we believe that significant advances in modeling tools are possible using visualization.  
what unique capabilities of our visual and cognitive systems can be leveraged to better help modelers exercise their craft  or to place modeling within reach of more people  in attempting to answer this question  we will of necessity consider theories of model building  vision  and cognition  and will examine the role of visualization in the modeling process. we will suggest areas of opportunity for advancing the state-of-the-art in visual modeling tools. 
1. the modeling process 
a model is an abstraction of reality. modeling  the act of building a model  can be described as the process of developing an analogical system of relations  and the resulting model is comprised of entities and the relationships between them . modeling is  a fundamental way in which human beings understand the world  . modeling is closely related to and may be thought of as a subset of problem solving. there are many kinds of models. the literature contains a variety of dimensions along which models may be classified. these include function  structure  dimensionality  degree of certainty  temporal reference  degree of generality  degree of closure  and degree of quantification . in seeking to improve the quality of computational models  and make their construction more universally achievable  we are most interested in the modeling process. morris   while warning against trying to move modeling too far out of the  intuitive  realm of an art  describes the process as consisting of the  context of discovery  and the  context of justification.  he observed that models are developed in a discovery context and then presented in a justification context that may have little  if any  resemblance to the original discovery process. this poses an impediment to those trying to learn modeling as a skill  since they are most often exposed to the justification context. the visualizations supporting each context may be quite different. 
several theories of modeling and problem solving divide the process into stages  1  1 . in general  the stages include problem identification or recognition  problem definition and structuring  alternative generation  alternative selection  and implementation. these are not carried out in sequential order but rather expert modelers move back and forth between stages as needed. complex problems are often decomposed into simpler problems  so the modeling process is applied recursively and the modeler can be in different stages at different levels of the problem.  
a number of researchers have examined how the modeling process varies with the experience-level of the modeler. the significantly better performance of experts can be at least partially explained by their superior organization of and access to knowledge. another characteristic is their continual selfmonitoring of progress. experts often suspend an activity at one stage and return to an  earlier  stage . less experienced problem solvers tend to move rapidly to the alternative generation and selection stage without sufficient problem identification and structuring . we refer to the thought processes that monitor progress in building a model as meta-cognition. a slightly different explanation of expert performance sees modeling as consisting of search and recognition. an expert is able to replace search with recognition  a faster and usually more reliable process . newell and simon  defined problem solving as the cooperative processes of understanding and searching. the understanding process generates the person's internal representation of the problem  mental model  and the search process generates a solution. if level of experience is seen as a continuum from beginner to expert  the beginner will approach a problem quite differently from the expert. however  after modest training  compared to the time required to become an expert  the novice will begin to take approaches similar to those of the expert. the novice  however  will search in less productive solution spaces and will make more mistakes .  
willemain  1  1   who studied the behavior of expert modelers  suggests five modeling  topics  or objects of attention which may be used to categorize the time spent creating a model. they are  1  problem context   1  model structure   1  model realization   1  model assessment  and  1  model implementation. during the context phase  which normally begins first  modelers tend to mentally step through the other stages. willemain found that the most time was spent on structure  average of 1%  followed distantly by assessment and context  1% and 1%  respectively . transitions between topics were frequent  with the largest number occurring between structure and assessment.  this frequent transition is an important distinguishing behavior of expert modelers.  because these expert modelers were performing their tasks in a laboratory setting  realization  assessment  and implementation probably received less attention than they would in a real-world problem where validation and successful transition of the model to the customer  users  become critical issues. 
