collaborative filtering  cf  is valuable in e-commerce  and for direct recommendations for music  movies  news etc. but today's systems have several disadvantages  including privacy risks. as we move toward ubiquitous computing  there is a great potential for individuals to share all kinds of information about places and things to do  see and buy  but the privacy risks are severe. in this paper we describe a new method for collaborative filtering which protects the privacy of individual data. the method is based on a probabilistic factor analysis model. privacy protection is provided by a peer-to-peer protocol which is described elsewhere  but outlined in this paper. the factor analysis approach handles missing data without requiring default values for them. we give several experiments that suggest that this is most accurate method for cf to date. the new algorithm has other advantages in speed and storage over previous algorithms. finally  we suggest applications of the approach to other kinds of statistical analyses of survey or questionaire data.
categories and subject descriptors
h.1  information storage and retrieval : information search and retrieval-information filtering; g.1  probability and statistics : correlation and regression analysis; d.1  management of computing and information systems : security and protection
general terms
algorithms experimentation security human factors
keywords
collaborative filtering  recommender systems  personalization  privacy  cscw  surveys  sparse  missing data
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
sigir'1  august 1  1  tampere  finland.
copyright 1 acm 1-1/1 ...$1.
1. introduction
　collaborative filtering has important applications in ecommerce  in recreation  music  video  movie recommendations   and in information filtering in the office. personalized purchase recommendations on a web site significantly increase the likelihood over a customer making a purchase  compared to unpersonalized suggestions. in future ubiquitous computing settings  users will routinely be able to record their own locations  via gps on personal computing devices and phones   and their purchases  through digital wallets or through their credit card records . through collaborative filtering  users could get recommendations about many of their everyday activities  including restaurants  bars  movies  and interesting sights to see and things to do in a neighborhood or city. but such applications are infeasible without strong protection of individual data privacy.
　most online vendors collect purchase records for their customers  and make reasonable efforts to keep the raw data private. however  there appear to be no studies of how easily recommender sites can be  mined  for customer preference information. with some simple techniques  we have found that several published schemes  especially correlation-based schemes  are extremely vulnerable. furthermore  customer data is a valuable asset and it is routinely sold when companies have suffered bankruptcy. at this time this practice is supported by case law. in fact companies are required to disclose to customers that purchase records will likely be sold if the company suffers a bankruptcy.
　a second problem with today's server-based systems is that they encourage monopolies. there are correlations between customer purchase choices across product domains. so companies that can acquire preference data for many users in one product domain have a considerable advantage when entering another. even within one market  an established firm will have an advantage over a newer competitor  because the latter will have a smaller corpus of customer data to draw from  leading to less successful recommendations. from the customer's perspective  their purchase history is fragmented across many vendors reducing the quality of recommendations to them.
　finally  as collaborative filtering techniques become more widespread  they constitute an important part of the process of diffusion of innovations through society . diffusion in real societies relies on both homophilous diffusion where recommendations come from others like the inquirer  and heterophilous diffusion  where the inquirer explicitly seeks recommendations from individuals not like them  typically from experts or earlier adopters . today's collaborative filtering systems support homophilous diffusion  but offer no plausible version of heterophily. one goal of our work is to support recommendations from designated communities including professionals  enthusiasts  members of particular interest groups etc. we wanted to design a system that would allow non-members of communities to gain recommendations from them  just as in natural heterophilous diffusion. this pushes two of our design criteria:  i  the protocol should protect the privacy of individuals in the community while allowing individuals both inside and outside the community to gain recommendations from it;  ii  a peer-topeer design is very desirable to make it is as easy as possible for communities to construct electronic cf groups  even for communities with limited resources  e.g. ability to afford  configure and run a server .
　our work here builds on the recent paper  that introduced collaborative filtering with privacy. that paper describes a protocol for encrypting data and aggregating it and publishing the result. the aggregate can be downloaded by users who can use it to derive recommendations from their own preference data. the first contribution of the present paper is to introduce the privacy-preserving cf scheme to the sigir community and give a simplified description of the protocol. the second contribution is a new collaborative filtering scheme which preserves privacy and which appears to be the most accurate cf scheme developed so far. the third contribution is a set of experiments using the new method  characterizing its accuracy  speed and storage requirements.
