this paper studies the problem of identifying comparative sentences in text documents. the problem is related to but quite different from sentiment/opinion sentence identification or classification. sentiment classification studies the problem of classifying a document or a sentence based on the subjective opinion of the author. an important application area of sentiment/opinion identification is business intelligence as a product manufacturer always wants to know consumers' opinions on its products. comparisons on the other hand can be subjective or objective. furthermore  a comparison is not concerned with an object in isolation. instead  it compares the object with others. an example opinion sentence is  the sound quality of cd player x is poor . an example comparative sentence is  the sound quality of cd player x is not as good as that of cd player y . clearly  these two sentences give different information. their language constructs are quite different too. identifying comparative sentences is also useful in practice because direct comparisons are perhaps one of the most convincing ways of evaluation  which may even be more important than opinions on each individual object. this paper proposes to study the comparative sentence identification problem. it first categorizes comparative sentences into different types  and then presents a novel integrated pattern discovery and supervised learning approach to identifying comparative sentences from text documents. experiment results using three types of documents  news articles  consumer reviews of products  and internet forum postings  show a precision of 1% and recall of 1%. more detailed results are given in the paper.   
categories and subject descriptors 
h.1  information storage and retrieval : information search and retrieval - information filtering. i.1  artificial intelligence : natural language processing - text analysis. 
general terms 
algorithms  performance. 
keywords 
comparative sentences  sentiment classification  text mining. 
 
1. introduction  
comparisons are one of the most convincing ways of evaluation. extracting comparative sentences from text is useful for many applications. for example  in the business environment  whenever a new product comes into market  the product manufacturer wants to know consumer opinions on the product  and how the product compares with those of its competitors. much of such information is now readily available on the web in the form of customer reviews  forum discussions  blogs  etc. extracting such information can significantly help businesses in their marketing and product benchmarking efforts. in this paper  we focus on comparisons. clearly  product comparisons are not only useful for product manufacturers  but also to potential customers as they enable customers to make better purchasing decisions.  
in the past few years  a significant amount of research was done on sentiment and opinion extraction and classification. in section 1  we will discuss the existing literature and compare it with our work  where related research from linguistics is also included. comparisons are related but also quite different from sentiments and opinions  which are subjective. comparisons on the other hand can be subjective or objective. for example  an opinion sentence on a car may be  car x is very ugly . a subjective comparative sentence 
may be 
 car x is much better than car y  
an objective comparative sentence may be  
 car x is 1 feet longer than car y   
we can see that in general comparative sentences use quite different language constructs from typical opinion sentences  although the first sentence above is also an opinion . in this paper  we aim to study the problem of identifying comparative sentences in text documents  e.g.  news articles  consumer reviews of products  forum discussions. this problem is challenging because although we can see that the above example sentences all contain some indicators  comparative adverbs and comparative adjectives   i.e.   better    longer   many sentences that contain such words are not comparatives  e.g.   i cannot agree with you more . similarly  many sentences that do not contain such indicators are comparative sentences  e.g.   cellphone x has bluetooth  but cellphone y does 

 
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  or republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
sigir'1  august 1  1  seattle  washington  usa. 
copyright 1 acm 1-1/1...$1. 
 
not have.   
in this paper  we first classify comparative sentences into different categories based on existing linguistic research. we also expand them with additional categories that are important in practice. we then propose a novel approach based on pattern discovery and supervised learning to identify comparative sentences. the basic idea of our technique is to first use a keyword strategy to achieve a high recall  and then build a machine learning model to automatically classify each sentence into one of the two classes   comparative  and  non-comparative   based on the filtered data to improve the precision. in building the learning model  class sequential rules automatically generated from the data are used as features.  
class sequential rules are different from traditional sequential patterns  1  1  1  because a class label is attached  which results in a rule with a sequential pattern on the left-hand-side of the rule  and a class on the right-hand-side of the rule. in our context  the classes are  comparative  or  non-comparative . our system is able to generate such rules. a further advancement of our work is the use of multiple minimum supports in mining. existing sequential pattern mining techniques in data mining use only a single minimum support  to control the pattern generation process so that not too many patterns are produced. the minimum support is simply the probability that a pattern appears in a sentence  which is estimated as the ratio of the number of sentences containing the pattern and the total number of sentences in the data. the single minimum support model from data mining is not sufficient for our work because some patterns  although very accurate  appear much less frequently in the data than others. if the minimum support is set very low in order to catch these infrequent patterns  the frequent words will produce a huge number of spurious patterns  which harm the classification because they may overfit the data. the multiple minimum supports model deals with this problem effectively. 
our experiment results confirmed that class sequential rules are highly useful for the final classification. since each class sequential rule has a class confidence  which is the conditional probability that a sentence is a comparative sentence given that it contains the sequential pattern on the left-hand-side  the rules can naturally be used for classification because confidence is basically a measure of predictability. however  our results show that they do not perform well. the classifier built using a learning algorithm based on the class sequential rules performs much better. the key reason for the weaker performance of the rules is that a given sentence may satisfy several rules and the rules may conflict with each other  e.g.  one rule says that a sentence is a comparative sentence  but another says it is a non-comparative sentence. to deal with such conflicts  a principled method is needed to combine all the rules to arrive at a single classification. the na ve bayesian model provides a natural solution.  
we then used the na ve bayesian model  1  1  to learn a classifier using the class sequential rules as features. for comparison purposes  we also experimented with support vector machines  svm   1  1   which is considered to be one of the strongest classifier building methods. we conducted empirical evaluation using three types of documents  news articles  consumer reviews of products  and internet forum discussions. our task is to identify comparative sentences in such input texts. our experimental results based on 1-fold cross validation show an overall precision of 1% and an overall recall of 1%. the na ve bayesian classifier outperforms svm. detailed results and comparisons are presented and discussed in section 1.  
we note that after comparative sentences are identified  extracting the comparative relation in each sentence is also of great importance  i.e.  what are compared and which is better. this extraction problem is studied in .  
in summary  this paper makes three contributions: 
1. it proposes to study the problem of identifying comparative sentences in text. to the best of our knowledge  there is no reported study on this problem so far. although linguists have studied the semantics of some comparative constructs  their work is more for human understanding and thus not directly applicable to our task. there is no reported computational method to identify comparative sentences. 
1. a categorization of comparative sentences into different types is proposed based on the linguistic research. however  we extended the existing types by including some more which are also important in practice.  
1. we propose an effective approach to solve the problem based on class sequential rules and the machine learning technology. experiment results demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed approach. 
this paper is organized as follows: the next section discusses the related work. section 1 gives the problem statement and categorizes different types of comparative sentences  which expands what are available from linguistics. section 1 presents the proposed technique. section 1 evaluates it and section 1 concludes the paper and discusses future directions. 
1. related work 
related work to ours comes from both computer science and linguistics. researchers in linguistics focus primarily on defining the syntax and semantics of comparative constructs. they do not deal with the identification of comparative sentences from a text document computationally.  studies the semantics and syntax of comparative sentences  but uses only limited vocabulary. it is not able to do our task of identifying comparative sentences.  discusses gradability of comparatives and measure of gradability. the semantic analysis is based on logic  which is not directly applicable to identifying comparative sentences. the types of comparatives  such as adjectival  adverbial  nominal  superlatives  etc  are described in . the focus of these researches is on a limited set of comparative constructs which have gradable keywords like more  less  etc. in summary  although linguists have studied comparatives  their semantic analysis of comparatives based on logic and grammars is more for human consumption than for automatic identification of comparative sentences by computers.   
in text and data mining  we have not found any direct work on comparative sentences. the most closely related work is sentiment classification and opinion extraction  which as we pointed out in the introduction section are related but quite different from our work. 
sentiment classification classifies opinion texts or sentences as positive or negative. work of hearst  on classification of entire documents uses models inspired by cognitive linguistics. das and chen  use a manually crafted lexicon in conjunction with several scoring methods to classify stock postings. tong  generates sentiment  positive and negative  timelines by tracking online discussions about movies over time. 
 applies a unsupervised learning technique based on mutual information between document phrases and the words  excellent  and  poor  to find indicative words of opinions for classification.  examines several supervised machine learning methods for sentiment classification of movie reviews.  also experiments a number of learning methods for review classification. they show that the classifiers perform well on whole reviews  but poorly on sentences because a sentence contains much less information.  
 investigates sentence subjectivity classification. a method is proposed to find adjectives that are indicative of positive or negative opinions.  proposes a similar method for nouns. other related works on sentiment classification and opinions discovery include  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1 . 
in  1  1   several unsupervised and supervised techniques are proposed to analyze opinions in customer reviews. specifically  they identify product features that have been commented on by customers and determining whether the opinions are positive or negative.  1  1  improve the work in . however  none of these studies is on comparison  which is the focus of this work. 
1. problem definition 
in this section  we state the problem that we aim to solve. we first give a linguistic view of comparatives  also called comparative constructions  and identify some limitations. we then enhance them by including implicit comparatives  and state the problem that we deal with in this paper.  
since we need part-of-speech  pos  tags throughout this section and the paper  let us first acquaint ourselves with some tags and their pos categories. we used brill's tagger  to tag sentences. it follows the penn tree bank  pos tagging scheme. the pos tags and their categories that are important to this work are: nn: noun  nnp: proper noun  vbz: verb  present tense  1rd person singular  jj: adjective  rb: adverb  jjr: adjective  comparative  jjs: adjective  superlative  rbr: adverb  comparative  rbs: adverb  superlative.  
1 linguistic perspective 
linguists have studied comparatives in the english language for a long time.  defines comparatives as universal quantifiers over degrees. for example   john is taller than he was   the degree d is john's height and john is tall to degree d. in other words  comparatives are used to express explicit orderings between objects with respect to the degree or amount to which they possess some gradable property . the two broad types of comparatives as given in  are: 
1  metalinguistic comparatives: those which compare the extent to which an entity has one property to a greater or lesser extent than another property. for example   ronaldo is angrier than upset.  
1  propositional comparatives: those that make a comparison between two propositions. this category has subcategories: 
a. nominal comparatives: they compare the cardinality of two sets of entities denoted by nominal phrases. ex:  paul ate more grapes than bananas  
b. adjectival comparatives: they usually have words that end with -er  more  less  etc.  occurring with the conjugate than  and equative as  ex: as good as . ex:  ford is cheaper than volvo.  
c. adverbial comparatives: they are similar to nominal and adjectival ones except that they generally occur after a verb phrase. ex:  tom ate more quickly than jane.  
then there are superlatives which are a form of adjectives or adverbs that express the highest or a very high degree of quality of what is being described. they have two categories: 
1  adjectival superlatives: such a superlative is used to say what thing or person has the most of a particular quality within a group or of its kind. ex:  john is the tallest person.  
1  adverbial superlatives: the superlative is used to say what thing or person does something to the greater degree within a group or of its kind. ex:  jill did her homework most frequently  
english grammar also has coordinations like  john and sue  both like sushi  which sometimes express the relation of type equality. these sentences use coordinating conjunctions like and  or  etc. 
the above linguistic classification of comparative sentences has two limitations. 
1  non-comparatives with comparative words: in linguistics  sentences containing comparative adjectives  jjr  and adverbs  rbr   e.g.  more  less  better  longer and words ending with - er   words like same  similar  differ and those used with equative as  e.g.  same as  as well as  or superlative adjectives  jjs  and adverbs  rbs   e.g.  most  least  best  tallest and words ending with -est  are considered comparisons. however  in practice these comparative indicators may not be used for 
comparisons  e.g.   
 in the context of speed  faster means better  
 john has to try his best to win this game  
although these two sentences contain comparative words  they are not comparisons for practical purposes.  
there is also an issue of meaningless comparison  e.g.   more men than james like scotch on the rocks  it compares noncompatible entities. 
1  limited coverage: in practice  there are many comparative sentences which do not contain any of the above comparative words. consider a few examples: 
 in market capital  intel is way ahead of amd.  
 nokia  samsung  both cell phones perform badly on heat dissipation index.   
 the m1 earned a world bench score of 1  whereas asus a1v posted a mark of 1  
none of them contain any comparative words above.  
1 our enhancements 
to address the first limitation  we will use computational methods  e.g.  machine learning methods  to distinguish comparatives and non-comparatives.  
