reflecting the rapid growth in the utilization of large test collections for information retrieval since the 1s  extensive comparative experiments have been performed to explore the effectiveness of various retrieval models. however  most collections were intended for retrieving newspaper articles and technical abstracts. in this paper  we describe the process of producing a test collection for patent retrieval  the ntcir-1 patent retrieval collection  which includes two years of japanese patent applications and 1 topics produced by professional patent searchers. we also report experimental results obtained by using this collection to reexamine the effectiveness of existing retrieval models in the context of patent retrieval. the relative superiority among existing retrieval models did not significantly differ depending on the document genre  that is  patents and newspaper articles. issues related to patent retrieval are also discussed.
categories and subject descriptors
h.1  information search and retrieval : retrieval models; h.1  systems and software : performance evaluation; h.1  online information services : data sharing
general terms
measurement  performance  experimentation
keywords
test collections  patent retrieval  retrieval models

 the second author is also a member of crest  japan science and technology corporation.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
sigir'1  july 1-august 1  1  toronto  canada.
copyright 1 acm 1-1/1 ...$1.
1. introduction
　reflecting the rapid growth in the utilization of large test collections for information retrieval  ir  since the 1s  extensive comparative experiments have been performed to explore the effectiveness of various retrieval models. a sample of existing test collections includes those produced in trec1  clef1  and ntcir1  where most of the target documents are newspaper articles and abstracts in technical publications.
　in the third ntcir workshop  ntcir-1   which was held over a period of one and a half years  from june 1 to december 1   the first serious effort was made to explore information retrieval  targeting patent documents. during the ntcir-1 workshop  the authors of this paper organized the patent retrieval task  1  where a test collection of patent documents was produced and used to evaluate a number of participating ir systems.
　while a number of commercial patent retrieval systems and services have operated for a long time  patent retrieval has not received much attention in the ir community. a major reason is the lack of test collections targeting patent information. although a trec test collection includes patent documents  the proportion of those documents is quite small. consequently  most systems do not seriously use techniques focusing on patent documents  because the effect may be overshadowed by a larger number of other genres of documents  such as newspaper articles. however  patent documents  applications  are associated with a number of interesting characteristics  such as document length and document structures  for information retrieval  even from a scientific point of view. this background motivated us to promote research and development on patent information retrieval  by providing a test collection consisting of patent documents.
　the purpose of this paper is twofold. first  we describe the process of producing the above collection  namely the ntcir-1 patent retrieval collection  section 1 . second  we report experimental results obtained by using this collection  section 1 . in brief  our focus is to re-examine the effectiveness of existing retrieval models in the context of patent information retrieval  which has not been explored much in past ir literature.
1. ntcir-1 patent retrieval task
1 task description
　the process of patent retrieval differs significantly depending on the type  purpose  of retrieval  such as technology survey or invalidity search. each retrieval type was fundamentally worth exploring in the ntcir-1 workshop. however  certain retrieval types require a sufficient number of patent documents. for example  in invalidity search  professional users usually search at least five years worth of patents for applications conflicting with the patent in question. at the same time  for many  potential  participant groups  processing an enormous volume of patent information seemed prohibitive. in view of this problem  we focused on a specific type of  technology survey  where two years of patents were used as target documents.
　in our technology survey task  we focused on novice users  such as business managers  who usually do not use retrieval systems by themselves  but command professional searchers to obtain patent documents relevant to their information needs. we assumed a scenario in which a business manager reading a newspaper clips out an article associated with an interesting technology. the manager asks a professional searcher  an expert  to find patent documents related to the clipping. the manager may also hands an additional memorandum to the searcher to clarify the information required if the clippings are not informative and include irrelevant sentences  figure 1 . from a different perspective  the above scenario can be seen as a cross-genre  or cross-database  retrieval  where a newspaper article and supplementary description are used as a query to search a patent collection for documents relevant to the query.
　it should be noted that although claims are more informative and important than other fields  e.g.  example fields  in many retrieval scenarios  methods relying mainly on claims are not necessarily appropriate for the purpose of technology surveys. it should also be noted that while precision is generally more important than recall for invalidity searches  both precision and recall are important for technology surveys. thus  we used standard precision/recall-based measures to evaluate participating systems.
　to sum up  in the ntcir-1 patent retrieval task  participant groups were required to submit a list of relevant patent documents in response to a search topic consisting of a newspaper article and a supplementary description. search topics were in four languages. in other words  the same contents in japanese  english  korean  traditional/simplified chinese were used to perform cross-language retrieval1.
1 document collections
　in the ntcir-1 patent retrieval collection  target documents are two years worth of unexamined japanese patent
  patent survey before memo	product development
　　　　　　　　　  patents as technical for focusing  	documents  cf. legal disambiguation  	documents  etc.
figure 1: an example scenario of technology survey.
applications published in 1 and 1. fundamentally  those applications are used as a collection from which relevant documents are retrieved in response to search topics. the ntcir-1 patent retrieval collection also contains edited japanese/english abstracts for japanese applications published in 1. japanese abstracts  the japio patent abstracts  were edited on the basis of abstracts and claims in source applications. in other words  the japio patent abstracts are not exactly the same as the abstracts written by applicants. in addition  the length of the japio patent abstracts is standardized and the average number of characters in the abstracts is approximately 1. english abstracts  the patent abstracts of japan  paj   are human translations of the japio patent abstracts. those additional documents were primarily intended for training crosslanguage ir systems. however  those abstracts can also be used as target documents  because relevant abstracts can be identified from relevance assessments performed for applications. table 1 shows the overview of patent documents in the ntcir-1 patent retrieval collection.
table 1: documents in the ntcir-1 patent retrieval collection.
applicationsjapiopajtypefull textabstractabstractlanguagejapanesejapaneseenglishyears111# of documents11 1 1file size  byte 1m1m1m1 search topics
　as described in section 1  search topics consist of newspaper articles  clippings  and supplementary memorandums describing user information needs. to produce realistic topics  we asked 1 members of the intellectual property information search committee in the japan intellectual property association  jipa 1 to produce 1 topics. each jipa member belongs to the intellectual property division in the company he or she works for  and they are all experts in patent searching.
　figure 1 shows an example english search topic in sgml form. in this figure  the fields marked with  article  and  supplement  correspond to a newspaper clipping and supplementary memorandum  respectively. as with other existing test collections  search topics also contain fields for titles   title    descriptions   description    and narratives   narrative  . for each topic  the description field generally includes terms  words  used in the title field. intuitively  a combination of the article and supplement fields is as informative as the description field. however  newspaper articles often contain sentences irrelevant to search topics. example terms associated with a topic are marked with  concept . one or more patent application ids relevant to the newspaper article are marked with  pi . all 1 topics were initially written in japanese  and were manually translated into english  korean and  traditional or simplified chinese.
　in the patent retrieval task  for the purpose of crosssystem evaluation in a standard framework  each participant group was obliged to submit at least one retrieval result obtained with a combination of the article and supplement fields. however  in principle  any fields can be used to formulate queries depending on the purpose of evaluation.
1 relevance assessment
relevance assessment was performed as follows:
1. after/while producing topics  the jipa members performed manual searches to collect as many relevant patents as possible. we shall call the patent set assessed during the manual search  pj . the jipa members were allowed to use any systems and resources  so that we were able to obtain a patent document set retrieved under the circumstances of their daily patent searching.
1. participant groups submitted retrieval results  fromeach of which we extracted the top 1 patent documents  and produced a pool of patent documents for each of the 1 topics. we shall call this pool  ps .
1. the jipa members assessed the relevance for patentdocuments in  ps-pj   which were the patents they had not seen in their preliminary search.
grades of relevance were  a  relevant     b  partially relevant     c  irrelevant  judged by reading the content of a document    and  d  irrelevant  judged by looking at only the title of a document  . when judging a  b  and c  claims and other fields were considered equally important. the average numbers of a  b  c  and d documents were 1  1  1  and 1  respectively.
　to produce the first six topics  the 1 members were divided into six groups consisting of two members  and each group produced one topic and performed relevance assessment. if there was disagreement between two members in the same group  they negotiated with each other to complete the six topics. however  for the remaining 1 topics  each of the 1 members independently produced one or more topics and performed relevance assessment  because negotiation  cross-check  was time-consuming. in all cases  members created queries in the domain of their professional work.
　unlike existing methods for relevance assessment used in previous ntcir workshops  where manual searches were performed after pooling to increase the exhaustiveness of the relevant documents  we performed manual searches before pooling to enable the comparison of the search abilities of
 topic  num p1 /num  lang en /lang 
 purpose technology survey /purpose   title device to judge relative merits by comparing codes such as barcodes with each other /title 
 article 
 a-doc 
 a-docno ja-1 /a-docno 
 a-lang ja /a-lang 
 a-section society /a-section 
 a-ae no /a-ae 
 a-words 1 /a-words 
 a-headline bandai lost a lawsuit for piracy filed by epoch at tokyo district court /a-headline 
 a-date 1-1 /a-date 
 a-text 
in settlement of the lawsuit filed by epoch inc.  the toy manufacturer  against bandai co.  ltd. as compensation of 1 million for damages for infringement of a card game patent  the tokyo district court ordered bandai to pay about 1 million on the 1th. the presiding judge  mr. yoshiyuki mori  indicated that some functions including key operation for the  super barcode wars  mini game machine manufactured and sold by bandai co.  ltd. in july  1 to march  1 fell under the  technical range of a patent licensed to epoch inc. .
 /a-text 
 /a-doc 
 /article 
 supplement determination of victory or defeat by comparing each other's values based on codes from barcode readings does not conflict with the
patent. /supplement 
 description what kind of devices determines leaders or victors by reading several codes such as barcodes and comparing the values corresponding to these codes  /description   narrative  super barcode wars  is a type of mini game machine where recorded barcodes are read in cards featuring characters and the game proceeds in semi-real time by operating offence and defense keys. sample codes include barcodes and magnetic
codes  but shall not be defined as limited only to these. /narrative 
 concept sign  barcode  code  superiority or inferiority  victory or defeat  comparison 
judgment /concept 
 pi patent-kkh-g-h1 /pi   /topic 
figure 1: an example search topic in the ntcir-1 patent retrieval collection  topic id: p1 .
human experts and participant systems. the average numbers of a documents in  pj-ps    ps-pj   and  pj”ps  were 1  1  and 1  respectively. in other words  the numbers of relevant documents obtained by participating systems were fairly comparable with those obtained by the jipa members.
1. experimentation
1 overview
　the purpose of our experiments was to re-examine existing retrieval models from different perspectives  in the context of patent retrieval. for this purpose  we performed experiments on retrieving both patent documents and newspaper articles  and compared the results to find the scientific knowledge inherent in the patents  if any. thus  we used the ntcir-1 patent retrieval collection  described in section 1  and the ntcir-1 clir  cross-lingual information retrieval  test collection consisting of two years worth of japanese  mainichi  newspaper articles  to perform comparative experiments.
　it may be argued that we can obtain certain knowledge by analyzing official results obtained with participating systems in the ntcir-1 workshop. however  because fundamental modules  such as morphological analyzers and term weighting methods  differed depending on the system  it is difficult to conduct a glass-box evaluation. in view of this problem  we implemented different retrieval models  systems  and performed comparative experiments independently of the ntcir-1 workshop.
　we used the chasen morphological analyzer  version 1.1  combined with the ipa dictionary  version 1.1 to extract nouns  verbs  adjectives  and out-of-dictionary words  i.e.  words identified as  unknown  by chasen  as index terms from target documents  and performed word-based indexing. out-of-dictionary words are often technical terms. we also used the same method to extract terms from search topics. we used geta  generic engine for transportable association 1  which includes c/perl libraries for typical retrieval modules  and implemented different retrieval models on a distributed environment consisting of two pcs  cpu: dual xeon 1 ghz  ram: 1gb . because all the software toolkits and test collections used are available to the public  our experiments can easily be reproduced.
　we used the following contents as target documents independently:
  entire contents  full texts  of unexamined patent applications  full  
  author abstracts in unexamined patent applications
 abs  
  claims in unexamined patent applications  claim  
  a combination of abs and claim  abs+claim  
  the japio patent abstracts in 1 and 1  jsh  
  two years of mainichi newspaper articles in 1 and 1  newspaper .
here  unexamined patent applications are target documents in the ntcir-1 patent retrieval collection  i.e.  two years of japanese patent applications published in 1 and 1 . table 1 shows statistics associated with the document length in words for different target document types. by looking at this table  one can see that the average length of full is approximately 1 times that of newspaper. the standard variance of full is approximately 1 times that of newspaper. in other words  the length of patent applications in words significantly differs depending on the document. additionally  the maximum number of unique words  word types  contained in a single application is approximately 1  which is 1 times as large as that of newspaper articles.
　figure 1 shows the distribution of the document length in words for different target document types. in this figure  the distribution of the document length for abs and jsh is roughly a normal distribution.
table 1: statistics of document lengths in words.
genre	patent	newspaper
type	full abs claim abs+claim jsh
mean	1	1 1std. variance	1	1	11max1 1 1 11max  unique 1 111
　figure 1 shows the retrieval models compared in our experiments; they form a sample of typical models . in this figure   log tf .idf.dl  is equivalent to a metric used in the smart system . unlike the other seven models  smart and bm1 use the document length factor  which has been proved effective in the ir literature . it should be noted that because the nine retrieval models were implemented based on common software modules  differences among retrieval models in retrieval accuracy are because of the effectiveness of the models themselves.
　for the purpose of formulating queries in patent retrieval  we used the following  combinations of  topic fields independently:  description    description + narrative   and  article + supplement .
　for retrieving newspaper articles  we used  description  and a combination of  description  and  narrative   extracted from all 1 topics in the ntcir-1 clir collection. in all cases  we used only japanese topics.
1 results
　tables 1 and 1 show the mean average precision  map  values targeting patent documents and newspaper articles  respectively. in both tables  only a documents were regarded as relevant ones  i.e.  rigid relevance . figure 1 fundamentally shows the same information as tables 1 and 1  but the x/y-axes correspond to retrieval models and average precision values  respectively.
1 discussion
1
 although log    of the bm1 may have an anomalous negative value where nt is very large   we sticked to the original formula in the experiments.
　

figure 1: distribution of the document length in words.
hits baseline tf idf tf.idf
log tf 	 1 + log  log tf .idf	 1 + log  log tf .idf.dl	 1 + log 
bm1
ddocumentttermnnumber of documents in the collectionntnumber of documents in which term t existsbx texistence  1  or absence  1  of term t in xfx tfrequency of term t in xidft	inverse document frequency of term t  i.e.   1 + log  dlbx	number of unique terms in x dlfx	sum of term frequencies in x  i.e.   t（x fx t   avefx	average of term frequencies in x  i.e.      avedlb	average of dlbx in the collection
the normalized scores for fd t provided better results than those without normalization.
the values of the constants  s = 1 k = 1 b = 1  were determined through preliminary experiments.
figure 1: retrieval models    compared in our experiments.
table 1: mean average precision values over the 1 topics targeting patent information  rigid relevance .
fullabsclaimabs+claimjshretrieval modelddnasd	dnasddnasddnasd	dn	ashits.1.1.1.1	.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1	.1	.1baseline.1.1.1.1	.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1	.1	.1tf.1.1.1.1	.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1	.1	.1idf.1.1.1.1 .1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1 .1 .1tf.idf.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1log tf .1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1log tf .idf.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1log tf .idf+dl.1.1 .1.1.1.1.1.1 .1.1.1.1.1.1.1bm1.1.1	.1.1.1.1.1.1	.1.1 .1.1.1.1.1d:  description   n:  narrative   a:  article   s:  supplement 

figure 1: mean average precision values for different retrieval models.
table 1: mean average precision values over the 1 topics targeting mainichi newspaper articles  rigid relevance .
retrieval modelddnhits.1.1baseline.1.1tf.1.1idf.1.1tf.idf.1.1log tf .1.1log tf .idf.1.1log tf .idf+dl.1.1bm1.1.1d:  desc   n:  narr 
　
　we discuss suggestions derived from tables 1 and 1 and figure 1  from different perspectives.
term frequencies
in almost all cases  runs   the map value of the model relying solely on term frequencies  i.e.  the tf model  was smallest in all the models compared. the tf model was even worse than the hits and baseline models. additionally  the map value of the idf model was often decreased when combined with the tf model  i.e.  the tf.idf model 1.
　we used the paired t-test for statistical testing  which investigates whether the difference in performance is meaningful or simply because of chance  1  1 . table 1 shows that for patent retrieval  the map values of the idf and tf.idf models were significantly different in all 1 runs at the 1% level and in 1 cases at the 1% level  respectively. besides this  when retrieving newspaper articles  the map values of the idf and tf.idf models were significantly different in both runs at the 1% level. these results suggest that a simple  naive  use of term frequencies was not effective and even decreased the map value.
　however  the logarithmic formulation of term frequencies  i.e.  the log tf  models  was effective when combined with the idf model. that is  the map value of the log tf .idf model was greater than that of the idf model  specifically in cases where target documents are full texts. in table 1  the map values of the log tf .idf and idf models were significantly different in the three patent runs and the two newspaper runs  at the 1% level   respectively. at the same time  when retrieving abstracts  we could not find any significant differences between the log tf .idf and idf models in the map value. in other words  the log tf  model was effective in retrieving longer documents.
inverse document frequencies
inverse document frequencies were generally effective. for jsh and abs  the map value of the idf model was greater than those of the smart and bm1 models.
　for jsh  the map value of the idf model was greater than those of the other models  irrespective of the topic field used. the map values of the idf model and the second highest model were significantly different at the 1% level  which is not shown in the tables . additionally  for abs  the map value of the idf model was greater than those of the other models except  as . the map values of the idf model and the second highest model were significantly different at the 1% level  which is not shown in tables .
　one possible rationale is that because abstracts  jsh and abs  are standardized  normalized  in terms of document length  the effect of the document length model in smart and bm1 was decreased.
comparison between smart and bm1
the map values of smart and bm1 were generally greater than those of the other models. the difference between smart and bm1 in the map value was marginal. in fact  in table 1 the map values of smart and bm1 were significantly different at the 1% level  for only five cases. however  for cross-genre retrieval  i.e.  scenarios where queries were formulated from combinations of  article  and  supplement    the map value of smart was usually greater than that of bm1.
cross-genre retrieval
by comparing the map values obtained with  description  and  narrative  and those obtained with combinations of  article  and  supplement   one can see that the map value of cross-genre retrieval was generally smaller than that of conventional retrieval.
　a possible rationale is that the distribution of term frequencies differs depending on the document genre. in fact  in the ntcir-1 patent retrieval task  a retrieval model using different term frequencies depending on the genre  improved the map value of a standard model. at the same time  we do not pretend to draw any premature conclusions regarding the relative merits of different models in crossgenre retrieval. this issue remains an open question and should be further explored.
comparison between full texts and abstracts
the map values targeting full patent texts were generally greater than those for abstracts. specifically  for smart and bm1  the map values of full texts and abstracts were significantly different at the 1% level  which is not shown in the tables .
　by comparing jsh and abs in table 1  the map value of jsh was greater than that of abs  except for the tf model. in table 1  the differences were statistically significant at the 1% level  for most cases. this suggests that professional abstracts generally maintain higher quality than author abstracts for retrieval purposes.
comparison between patents and newspapers
by looking at table 1  the relative superiority among different retrieval models did not significantly differ depending on the document genre  i.e.  patents and newspaper articles . this may be counter-intuitive  because patent documents are significantly different from newspaper articles from a number of perspectives  such as document length and terminology. however  those perspectives did not affect the results of our experiments. in other words  existing standard models were relatively effective even for patent retrieval.
　one possible rationale is that our experiments simulated technology survey  which was relatively similar to the conventional retrieval scenario  compared with invalidity search. to further explore this issue  in the ntcir-1 patent retrieval task  we plan to perform an invalidity search task where each participant group searches five years worth of patent applications for those that could invalidate the demand in an existing claim.
1. conclusion
　given the growing number of large test collections for information retrieval  ir  since the 1s  extensive comparative experiments have been performed to explore the effectiveness of various retrieval models. most collections consist of newspaper articles and abstracts in technical publications. while a number of commercial patent retrieval systems and services have operated for a long time  patent retrieval
fullabsclaimabs+claimjshfull	d	dnas	ddnas	ddn	asd	dn	as	ddnasd	dntable 1: t-test result of the differences between retrieval models.

	 	 : 1     : not significantly differenthas not received much attention in the ir community. one of the major reasons is the lack of test collections targeting patent information. this background motivated us to promote research and development on patent information retrieval  by providing a test collection consisting of patent documents.
　in this paper  we described the ntcir-1 patent retrieval collection and comparative experiments performed using this collection. first  we described the process of producing the ntcir-1 patent retrieval collection  which includes two years of japanese patent applications. this collection also includes five years of japanese patent abstracts and their english translations. since this collection was produced to evaluate ir systems for technology survey  search topics were produced on the basis of technical newspaper articles. human experts in patent searching produced 1 topics and also performed relevance assessment.
　second  we reported experimental results obtained by using the above collection. for these experiments  we used open software toolkits to implemented nine existing retrieval models and re-examined the effectiveness of those models in the context of patent retrieval. to investigate the scientific knowledge inherent in patent retrieval  we also used the ntcir-1 clir test collection consisting of two years of newspaper articles  and compared the results obtained with different genres of documents.
　through our experiments  we re-validated past experimental results  e.g.  discussions associated with the effectiveness of term frequencies  inverse document frequencies  and document length  in the context of patent retrieval. we also found that existing state-of-the-art retrieval models  i.e.  smart and bm1  were effective in patent retrieval.
　future work will include investigating the effectiveness of various indexing methods  such as character/phrase-based methods  for patent retrieval. to further explore patent retrieval from a scientific point of view  in the ntcir-1 patent retrieval task  we plan to perform an invalidity search task where users search five years worth of patent applications for those that can invalidate the demand in an existing claim.
