we propose a novel statistical method to predict large scale dyadic response variables in the presence of covariate information. our approach simultaneously incorporates the effect of covariates and estimates local structure that is induced by interactions among the dyads through a discrete latent factor model. the discovered latent factors provide a predictive model that is both accurate and interpretable. we illustrate our method by working in a framework of generalized linear models  which include commonly used regression techniques like linear regression  logistic regression and poisson regression as special cases. we also provide scalable generalized em-based algorithms for model fitting using both  hard  and  soft  cluster assignments. we demonstrate the generality and efficacy of our approach through large scale simulation studies and analysis of datasets obtained from certain real-world movie recommendation and internet advertising applications.
categories and subject descriptors
h.1  information systems : models and principles
general terms
algorithms  theory  experimentation
keywords
generalized linear regression  co-clustering  latent factor modeling  dyadic data
1.	introduction
　predictive modeling for dyadic data is an important data mining problem encountered in several domains such as social networks  recommendation systems  internet advertising  etc. such problems involve measurements on dyads  which are pairs of elements from two different sets. often  a response variable yij attached to dyads  i j  measures interactions among elements in these two sets. frequently  accompanying these response measurements are vectors of covariates xij that provide additional information which may help
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
kdd'1  august 1  1  san jose  california  usa.
copyright 1 acm 1-1-1/1 ...$1.
in predicting the response. these covariates could be specific to individual elements in the sets or to pairs from the two sets. in most large scale applications  the data is sparse  high dimensional  i.e.  large number of dyads   noisy  and heterogeneous; this makes statistical modeling a challenging task. we elucidate further with a real-world example.
　consider an online movie recommendation application such as netflix  which involves predicting preference ratings of users for movies. this preference rating can be viewed as a dyadic response variable yij; it depends both on the user i and the movie j and captures interactions that exist among users and movies. since both user and movie sets are large  the number of possible dyads is astronomical. however  most users rate only a small subset of movies  hence measurements  actual ratings provided by a user  are available only for a small fraction of possible dyads. in addition to the known user-movie ratings  there also exists other predictive information such as demographic information about users  movie content and other indicators of user-movie interactions  e.g.  is the user's favorite actor part of the movie cast  these predictive factors can be represented as a vector of covariates xij associated with user-movie dyad  i j . incorporating covariate information in the predictive model may improve performance in practice. it is also often the case that some latent unmeasured characteristics that are not captured by these covariates induce a local structure in our dyadic space  e.g.  spatial correlations induced due to cultural similarities . the main contribution of this paper is to show that accounting for such local structures directly in the predictive model along with information in the covariates often leads to better predictions. in fact  the local structures in some cases may provide additional insights about the problem and may lead to models that are both accurate and interpretable.
　the predictive problem discussed above is not specific to movie recommendation systems and arises in several other contexts. e.g.  click rate estimation for webpage-ad dyads in internet advertising  estimating probabilities of a call between telephone dyads in telecommunication networks  etc.  prior work provide solutions using both supervised and unsupervised learning approaches. the supervised learning approach involves building a regression or a classification model to predict the dyadic response yij solely as a function of the available covariates xij. it has been well-studied with considerable literature on selecting informative covariates and obtaining bounds on the generalization error . however  in general  this approach disregards any local structure that might be induced on the dyadic space due to other latent unmeasured factors. in contrast  the unsupervised approach focuses exclusively on capturing local structures in the response measurements on dyads. the discovered latent structures  e.g.  clusters  principal components  provide insights about the interactions in the dyadic space which are useful in the absence of informative covariates. in fact  these local structures provide a parsimonious model for succinctly capturing the interactions in the dyadic matrix. however  since this approach does not adjust for the effects of covariates  the resulting latent structure may contain redundant information.
　in this paper  we propose a statistical method that combines the benefits of both supervised and unsupervised learning approaches; we simultaneously incorporate the effect of covariates as in supervised learning and also account for any local structure that may be present in the data as in unsupervised learning. to achieve this  we model the response as a function of both covariates  captures global structure  and a discrete number of latent factors  captures local structure . referring elements in the two sets that form the dyads as rows and columns  our model assumes that the row and column elements are separately assigned to a finite number of row and column clusters  or factors . the cross-product of these row and column clusters partition the dyadic matrix into a small number of rectangular block clusters; these provide an estimate of our latent factors. the row-column decoupling strategy provides an efficient algorithm to estimate latent structures by iteratively performing separate row and column clusterings.
