searching for people on the web is one of the most common query types to the web search engines today. however  when a person name is queried  the returned webpages often contain documents related to several distinct namesakes who have the queried name. the task of disambiguating and finding the webpages related to the specific person of interest is left to the user. many web people search  weps  approaches have been developed recently that attempt to automate this disambiguation process. nevertheless  the disambiguation quality of these techniques leaves a major room for improvement. this paper presents a new serverside weps approach. it is based on collecting co-occurrence information from the web and thus it uses the web as an external data source. a skyline-based classification technique is developed for classifying the collected co-occurrence information in order to make clustering decisions. the clustering technique is specifically designed to  a  handle the dominance that exists in data and  b  to adapt to a given clustering quality measure. these properties allow the framework to get a major advantage in terms of result quality over all the latest weps techniques we are aware of  including all the 1 methods covered in the recent weps competition .
categories and subject descriptors: h.1  information storage and retrieval :information search and retrieval; h.1 information storage and retrieval :online information services- web-based services
general terms:algorithms  experimentation  measurement
keywords: clustering  skyline based classifier  weps  web people search  named entity co-occurrences  social network  web querying
1.	introduction
the rapid growth of the internet has made the web a

 this research was supported by nsf awards number 1 and 1.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
sigir'1  july 1  1  singapore.
copyright 1 acm 1-1-1/1 ...$1.
popular place for collecting information. today  internet users access billions of web pages online using search engines. searching for a specific person is one of the most popular search queries. some statistics suggest that such searches account for as much as 1% of all search queries .
　when a web search engine is queried with a person name  it returns a collection of webpages. let d = {d1 d1 ... dk} be the set of the top k returned results. the webpages in d are related to the set of one or more namesakes who have the queried name  where these namesakes are unknown beforehand. the goal of a web people search  weps  system is to automatically cluster the webpages in d such that each cluster corresponds to a namesake.
　most popular search engines of today such as google and yahoo! do not yet provide weps capabilities  leaving the disambiguation task of finding the webpages of a person of interest to the user. for instance  when google is queried with the name  william cohen   the top 1 returned webpages refer to at least 1 different namesakes whose name is  william cohen . thus the task of locating all the webpages about a specific william cohen  for instance the cmu professor  can present a challenge to the user. frequently the problem does not disappear even if the context keywords are provided along with the person name. for instance  the returned webpages for the above query with the additional keyword  cmu   a  will not include his webpages that do not include cmu   making the recall lower  and  b  will actually still refer to more than one namesake  thus not leading to perfect precision either. such issues explain the motivation and the ever increasing interest in weps systems  whose goal is to provide the user with more structured and more powerful web search capabilities for this specific type of query.
　one of the key challenges that needs to be overcome to make the weps functionality a reality  is to build a weps system that is capable of reaching high disambiguation quality. this has proven to be a nontrivial task  as corroborated by the results of a recent weps competition .
　given that there is already a significant number of weps techniques it is important to understand what distinguishes this work from other solutions. the proposed approach is a two-step clustering method. first the named entities  nes  are extracted from each webpage d （ d. the extracted nes are people names and organizations that represent the social network of the namesake referred to by d. then  for each distinct pair of webpages di dj （ d the framework computes tf/idf similarity based on nes only. if this similarity is sufficiently large  the two pages are merged into one cluster.
　in the second step of the approach  for each di dj pair that is still unmerged  the algorithm forms queries to a web search engine that combine the nes from di and dj. the web search engine results are the co-occurrence counts that tell how often elements of the two social networks co-occur on the web and thus how strongly they are related. these counts are computed both  in the context of the queried name and without it. the counts are then transformed to form similarity features for the di dj pair. while there is research efforts on using related feature types for some domains  e.g.  1 1   we are unaware of any work that employs such features for weps. collecting such features is a time consuming operation  unless it is performed at a server  web search engine  side. furthermore  web search engine apis have significant restrictions on the number of queries allowed per day. thus  the proposed approach in its current form is inherently a server-side solution.
　proper features selection is one of the important contributions of this paper. however  the key is to develop an algorithm to utilize the chosen features well in order to build a weps system that gets high disambiguation quality results. we have developed a skyline-based feature classification algorithm for this purpose. this algorithm is the main contribution of this paper. the algorithm gains its advantage by  a  taking into account dominance that exists in the cooccurrence data and  b  by using a supervised learning to tune itself to both  the weps domain and a given quality metric.
　the rest of this paper is organized as follows. section 1 summarizes the related research work. section 1 provides an overview of the proposed approach. it is followed by section 1 that covers the steps of the algorithm in more detail. the proposed approach is empirically evaluated in section 1 and compared to some of the state of the art solutions. section 1 concludes the paper by highlighting the impact of the proposed solution.
1.	related work
　the web people search challenge is closely related to the well-studied entity resolution problem. in our previous work we also have developed interrelated techniques to solve various entity resolution challenges  e.g.  1-1 . the approach covered in the paper  however  is not related to those techniques. the key algorithm for training the skylinebased classifier is new. in fact  we are unaware of any entity resolution technique that would use a similar approach under any context.
　there are several research efforts that address specifically web person search and related challenges  1 1 1 1 . the approach of  is based on exploiting the link structure of pages on the web  with the hypotheses that web pages belonging to the same real person are more likely to be linked together. three algorithms are presented for disambiguation  the first is just exploiting the link structure of web pages and forming clusters based on link analysis  the second algorithm is based on word similarities between documents and does clustering using agglomerative/conglomerative double clustering  a/dc   the third approach combines link analysis with a/dc clustering. the work in  clusters documents based on the entity  person  organization  and location  names and can be applied to the disambiguation of semi-structured documents  such as web pages. the primary new contribution is the development of a document generation model that explains  for a given document how entities of various types  other person names  locations  and organizations  are  sprinkled  onto the document.
　in sem-eval 1  a workshop on weps task was held . sixteen different teams from different universities have participated to the task. the participated systems utilized named entities  tokens  urls  etc that exist in the documents. it has been shown that as the extracted information increases the quality of the clustering increases. use of different ne recognition tools affects the results of clustering as well. the ne based single link clustering was the one of the top three systems   because the named entity network alone enables to identify most of the individuals.
　there are also a few publicly available web search engines that offer related functionality  in that web search results are returned in clusters. clusty  http://www.clusty.com  from vivisimo inc. and kartoo  http://www.kartoo.com  are search engines that return clustered results. however the clusters are determined based on intersection of broad topics  for instance research related pages could form one cluster and family pages could form another cluster  or page source  also the clustering does not take into account the fact that multiple persons can have the same name. for all of these engines  clustering is done based on entire web page content or based on the title and abstract from a standard searchengine result. zoominfo  http://www.zoominfo.com/  and spock  http://www.spock.com/  are commercially available people search engines.
