we present a probabilistic generative model of entity relationships and textual attributes that simultaneously discovers groups among the entities and topics among the corresponding text. block-models of relationship data have been studied in social network analysis for some time. here we simultaneously cluster in several modalities at once  incorporating the words associated with certain relationships. significantly  joint inference allows the discovery of groups to be guided by the emerging topics  and vice-versa. we present experimental results on two large data sets: sixteen years of bills put before the u.s. senate  comprising their corresponding text and voting records  and 1 years of similar data from the united nations. we show that in comparison with traditional  separate latent-variable models for words or blockstructures for votes  the group-topic model's joint inference improves both the groups and topics discovered.
categories and subject descriptors
i.1  artificial intelligence : learning; h.1  database management : database applications-data mining
general terms
algorithms  experimentation
keywords
graphical models  text modeling  relational learning
1. introduction
모research in the field of social network analysis  sna  has led to the development of mathematical models that discover patterns in interaction between entities  1  1  1 . one of the objectives of sna is to detect salient groups of entities. group discovery has many applications  such as understanding the social structure of organizations  or native
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
linkkdd 1 chicago  il  usa copyright 1 acm 1-1...$1.
tribes   uncovering criminal organizations   and modeling large-scale social networks in internet services such as friendster.com or linkedin.com.
모social scientists have conducted extensive research on group detection  especially in fields such as anthropology  and political science  1  1 . recently  statisticians and computer scientists have begun to develop models that specifically discover group memberships  1  1  1  1 . one such model is the stochastic blockstructures model   which discovers the latent structure  groups or classes based on pair-wise relation data. a particular relation holds between a pair of entities  people  countries  organizations  etc.  with some probability that depends only on the class  group  assignments of the entities. the relations between all the entities can be represented with a directed or undirected graph. the class assignments can be inferred from a graph of observed relations or link data using gibbs sampling . this model is extended in  to automatically select an arbitrary number of groups by using a chinese restaurant process prior.
모the aforementioned models discover latent groups only by examining whether one or more relations exist between a pair of entities. the group-topic  gt  model presented in this paper  on the other hand  considers not only the relations between objects but also the attributes of the relations  for example  the text associated with the relations  when assigning group membership.
모the gt model can be viewed as an extension of the stochastic blockstructures model  1  1  with the key addition that group membership is conditioned on a latent variable associated with the attributes of the relation. in our experiments  the attributes of relations are words  and the latent variable represents the topic responsible for generating those words. unlike previous methods  our model captures the  language  attributes associated with interactions between entities  and uses distinctions based on these attributes to better assign group memberships.
모consider a legislative body and imagine its members forging alliances  forming groups   and voting accordingly. however  different alliances arise depending on the topic of the resolution up for a vote. for example  one grouping of the legislators may arise on the issue of taxation  while a quite different grouping may occur for votes on foreign trade. similar patterns of topic-based affiliations would arise in other types of entities as well  e.g.  research paper co-authorship relations between people and citation relations between papers  with words as attributes on these relations.
모in the gt model  the discovery of groups is guided by the emerging topics  and the discovery of topics is guided by emerging groups. both modalities are driven by the common goal of increasing data likelihood. consider the voting example again; resolutions that would have been assigned the same topic in a model using words alone may be assigned to different topics if they exhibit distinct voting patterns. distinct word-based topics may be merged if the entities vote very similarly on them. likewise  multiple different divisions of entities into groups are made possible by conditioning them on the topics.
모the importance of modeling the language associated with interactions between people has recently been demonstrated in the author-recipient-topic  art  model . in art the words in a message between people in a network are generated conditioned on the author  recipients and a set of topics that describes the message. the model thus captures both the network structure within which the people interact as well as the language associated with the interactions. in experiments with enron and academic email  the art model is able to discover role similarity of people better than sna models that consider network connectivity alone. however  the art model does not explicitly capture groups formed by entities in the network.
모the gt model simultaneously clusters entities to groups and clusters words into topics  unlike models that generate topics solely based on word distributions such as latent dirichlet allocation . in this way the gt model discovers salient topics relevant to relationships between entities in the social network-topics which the models that only examine words are unable to detect.
모we demonstrate the capabilities of the gt model by applying it to two large sets of voting data: one from us senate and the other from the general assembly of the un. the model clusters voting entities into coalitions and simultaneously discovers topics for word attributes describing the relations  bills or resolutions  between entities. we find that the groups obtained from the gt model are significantly more cohesive  p-value   .1  than those obtained from the blockstructures model. the gt model also discovers new and more salient topics in both the senate and un datasets-in comparison with topics discovered by only examining the words of the resolutions  the gt topics are either split or joined together as influenced by the voters' patterns of behavior.
1. group-topic model
모the group-topic model is a directed graphical model that clusters entities with relations between them  as well as attributes of those relations. the relations may be either directed or undirected and have multiple attributes. in this paper  we focus on undirected relations and have words as the attributes on relations.
모in the generative process for each event  an interaction between entities   the model first picks the topic t of the event and then generates all the words describing the event where each word is generated independently according to a multinomial  discrete  distribution 뷋t  specific to the topic t. to generate the relational structure of the network  first the group assignment  gst for each entity s is chosen conditionally from a particular multinomial  discrete  distribution 붿t over groups for each topic t. given the group assignments on an event b  the matrix v  b  is generated where each cell represents if the groups of two entities  i and j  behaved the same or not during the event b   e.g.  voted the same or not symbol	description

git	entity i's group assignment in topic t
tb	topic of an event b
	the kth token in the event b 	entity i and j's groups behaved same  1 
or differently  1  on the event b
s number of entities
t number of topics
g	number of groups
b	number of events
v	number of unique words
nb	number of word tokens in the event b
sb	number of entities who participated in the event b
table 1: notation used in this paper

figure 1: the group-topic model
on a bill . each element of v is sampled from a binomial
 bernoulli  distribution. our notation is summarized in table 1  and the graphical model representation of the model is shown in figure 1.
모without considering the topic of an event  or by treating all events in a corpus as reflecting a single topic  the simplified model  only the right part of figure 1  becomes equivalent to the stochastic blockstructures model . to match the blockstructures model  each event defines a relationship  e.g.  whether in the event two entities' groups behave the same or not. on the other hand  in our model a relation may have multiple attributes  which in our experiments are the words describing the event  generated by a
모per-topic multinomial  discrete  distribution .
모when we consider the complete model  the dataset is dynamically divided into t sub-blocks each of which corresponds to a topic. the complete gt model is as follows  tb	몲	uniform 
wit|뷋t몲multinomial 뷋t 뷋t|붾몲dirichlet 붾 git|붿t몲multinomial 붿t 붿t|붸몲dirichlet 붸  binomial 
 beta 붹 .
모we want to perform joint inference on  text  attributes and relations to obtain topic-wise group memberships. since inference can not be done exactly on such complicated probabilistic graphical models  we employ gibbs sampling to conduct inference. note that we adopt conjugate priors in our setting  and thus we can easily integrate out 붿  뷋 and 붺 to decrease the uncertainty associated with them. this simplifies the sampling since we do not need to sample 붿  뷋 and 붺 at all  unlike in . in our case we need to compute the conditional distribution p gst|w v g st t 붸 붹 붾  and p tb|w v g t b 붸 붹 붾   where g st denotes the group assignments for all entities except entity s in topic t  and t b represents the topic assignments for all events except event b. beginning with the joint probability of a dataset  and using the chain rule  we can obtain the conditional probabilities conveniently. the derivations are provided in detail in appendix a. in our setting  the relationship we are investigating is always symmetric  so we do not distinguish rij and rji in our derivations  only rij i 뫞 j  remain . thus
 
where ntg represents how many entities are assigned into group g in topic t  ctv represents how many tokens of word v are assigned to topic represents how many times group g and h vote same  k = 1  and differently  k = 1  on event b  i tb = t  is an indicator function  and  is the increase in if entity s were assigned to group gst than without considering s at all  if i tb = t  = 1  we ignore the increase in event b . furthermore 

where e vb  is the number of tokens of word v in event b. note that b is not a constant and changes with the assignment of tb since it influences the group assignments of all entities that vote on event b.
모the gt model uses information from two different modalities. in general  the likelihood of the two modalities is not directly comparable  since the number of occurrences of each type may vary greatly  e.g.  there may be far more pairs of voting entities than word occurrences . thus we use a weighting parameter to rescale the likelihoods from different modalities  as is also common in speech recognition when the acoustic and language models are combined.
1. related work
모there has been a surge of interest in models that describe relational data  or relations between entities viewed as links in a network  including recent work in group discovery. one such algorithm  presented by bhattacharya and getoor   is a bottom-up agglomerative clustering algorithm that partitions links in a network into clusters by considering the change in likelihood that would occur if two clusters were merged. once the links have been grouped  the entities connected by the links are assigned to groups.
모another model due to kubica et al.  considers both link evidence and attributes on entities to discover groups. the group detection algorithm  gda  uses a bayesian network to group entities from two datasets  demographic data describing the entities and link data. unlike our model  neither of these models  1  1  consider attributes associated with the links between the entities. the model presented in  considers attributes of an entity rather than attributes of relations between entities.
모the central theme of gt is that it simultaneously clusters entities and attributes on relations  words . there has been prior work in clustering different entities simultaneously  such as information theoretic co-clustering   and multi-way distributional clustering using pair-wise interactions . however  these models do not also cluster attributes based on interactions between entities in a network. in our model  group membership defines pair-wise relations between nodes. the gt model is an enhancement of the stochastic blockstructures model  and the extended model of kemp et al.  as it takes advantage of information from different modalities by conditioning group membership on topics. in this sense  the gt model draws inspiration from the role-author-recipient-topic  rart  model . as an extension of art model  rart clusters together entities with similar roles. in contrast  the gt model presented here clusters entities into groups based on their relations to other entities.
모exploring the notion that the behavior of an entity can be explained by its  hidden  group membership  jakulin and buntine  develop a discrete pca model for discovering groups. in the model each entity can belong to each of the k groups with a certain probability  and each group has its own specific pattern of behaviors. therefore  an entity's behavior depends on the probability of belonging to a group and the probability that the group has that behavior. they apply this model to voting data in the 1th us senate where the behavior of an entity is its vote on a resolution. a similar model is developed in  that examines group cohesion and voting similarity in the finnish parliament. we apply our gt model also to voting data. however  unlike  1  1   since our goal is to cluster entities based on the similarity of their voting patterns  we are only interested in whether a pair of entities voted the same or differently  not their actual yes/no votes. two resolutions on the same topic may differ only in their goal  e.g.  increasing vs. decreasing budget   thus the actual votes on one could be the converse of votes on the other. however  pairs of entities who vote the same on one resolution would tend to vote same on the other resolution. to capture this  we model relations as agreement between entities  not the yes/no vote itself. this kind of  contentignorant  feature is similarly found in some work on web log clustering .
모there has been a considerable amount of previous work in understanding voting patterns  1  1  1   including research on voting cohesion of countries in the eu parliament  and partisanship in roll call voting . in these models roll call data are used to estimate ideal points of a legislator  which refers to a legislator's preferred policy in the euclidean space of possible policies . the models assume that each vote in the roll call data is independent of the remaining votes  i.e.  each individual is not connected to anyone else who is voting.
datasetsavg. ai for gtavg. ai for baselinep-valuesenate11  .1un11  .1table 1: average ai for gt and baseline for both senate and un datasets. the group cohesion in gt is significantly better than in baseline.
however  in reality  legislation is shaped by the coalitions formed by like-minded legislators. the gt model attempts to capture this interaction.
1. experimental results
모we present experiments applying the gt model to the voting records of members of two legislative bodies: the us senate and the un general assembly.
모for comparison  we present the results of a baseline method that first uses a mixture of unigrams to discover topics and associate a topic with each resolution  and then runs the blockstructures model  separately on the resolutions assigned to each topic. this baseline approach is similar to the gt model in that it discovers both groups and topics  and has different group assignments on different topics. however  whereas the gt model performs joint inference simultaneously  the baseline performs inference serially. note that our baseline is still more powerful than the blockstructures models  since it models the topic associated with each event  and allows the creation of distinct groupings dependent on different topics.
모in this paper  we are interested in the quality of both the groups and the topics. in the political science literature  group cohesion is quantified by the agreement index  ai   1  1   which measures the similarity of votes cast by members of a group during a particular roll call. the ai for a particular group on a given roll call i is based on the number of group members that vote yes yi   no ni  or abstain ai  in the roll call i. higher ai index means better cohesion.

모the blockstructures model assumes that members of a legislative body have the same group affiliations irrespective of the topic of the resolution on vote. however  it is likely that members form their groups based on the topic of the resolution being voted on. we quantify the extent to which a member s switches groups with a group switch index  gsi .

where s~i and s~j are bit vectors of the length of the size of the legislative body. the kth bit of s~i is set if k is in the same group as s on topic i and similarly s~j corresponds to topic j. g s i  is the group of s on topic i which has a
size of |g s i | and g s j  is the group of s on topic j. we present entities that frequently change their group alliance according to the topics of resolutions.
모the group cohesion using the gt model is found to be significantly greater than the baseline group cohesion under pairwise t-test  as shown in table 1 for both the senate
economiceducationmilitary misc.energyfederaleducationgovernmentenergylaborschoolmilitarypowerinsuranceaidforeignwateraidchildrentaxnucleartaxdrugcongressgasbusinessstudentsaidpetrolemployeeelementarylawresearchcarepreventionpolicypollutiontable 1: top words for topics generated with the mixture of unigrams model on the senate dataset. the headers are our own summary of the topics.
economiceducationforeignsocial security+ domestic+ medicarelaboreducationforeignsocialinsuranceschooltradesecuritytaxfederalchemicalsinsurancecongressaidtariffmedicalincomegovernmentcongresscareminimumtaxdrugsmedicarewageenergycommunicabledisabilitybusinessresearchdiseasesassistancetable 1: top words for topics generated with the gt model on the senate dataset. the topics are influenced by both the words and votes on the bills.
and the un datasets  which indicates that the gt model is better able to capture cohesive groups. we find that nearly every document has a higher agreement index across groups using the gt model as compared to the baseline.
1 the us senate dataset
모our senate dataset consists of the voting records of senators in the 1st-1th us senate  1  obtained from the library of congress thomas database. during a roll call for a particular bill  a senator may respond yea or nay to the question that has been put to vote  else the vote will be recorded as not voting. we do not consider not voting as a unique vote since most of the time it is a result of a senator being absent from the session of the us senate. the text associated with each resolution is composed of its index terms provided in the database. there are 1 resolutions in our experiments  we excluded roll calls that were not associated with resolutions . each bill may come up for vote many times in the u.s. senate  each time with an attached amendment  and thus many relations may have the same attributes  index terms . since there are far fewer words than pairs of votes  we adjust the text likelihood to the 1th power  weighting factor 1  in the experiments with this dataset so as to balance its influence during inference.
모we cluster the data into 1 topics and 1 groups  cluster sizes are chosen somewhat arbitrarily  and compare the results of gt with the baseline. the most likely words for each topic from the traditional mixture of unigrams model is shown in table 1  whereas the topics obtained using gt are shown in table 1. the gt model collapses the topics education and energy together into education and domestic 
group 1group 1group 1 republicanscohen r-me armstrong r-co krueger d-tx danforth r-mo 
durenberger r-mn 
hatfield r-or garn r-ut 
humphrey r-nh 
mccain r-az group 11 democratschafee r-ri heinz r-pa mcclure r-id jeffords i-vt kassebaum r-ks roth r-de packwood r-or symms r-id specter r-pa wallop r-wy snowe r-me brown r-co collins r-me dewine r-oh 
thompson r-tn 
fitzgerald r-il 
voinovich r-oh  miller d-ga 
coleman r-mn table 1: senators in the four groups corresponding to topic education + domestic in table 1.
senatorgroup switch indexshelby d-al 1heflin d-al 1voinovich r-oh 1johnston d-la 1armstrong r-co 1table 1: senators that switch groups the most across topics for the 1st-1th senates
since the voting patterns on those topics are quite similar. the new topic social security + medicare did not have strong enough word coherence to appear in the baseline model  but it has a very distinct voting pattern  and thus is clearly found by the gt model. thus gt discovers topics that are salient in that they correlate with people's behavior and relations  not simply word co-occurrences.
모examining the group distribution across topics in the gt model  we find that on the topic economic the republicans form a single group whereas the democrats split into 1 groups indicating that democrats have been somewhat divided on this topic. with regard to education + domestic and social security + medicare  democrats are more unified whereas the republicans split into 1 groups. the group membership of senators on education + domestic issues is shown in table 1. we see that the first group of republicans include a democratic senator from texas  a state that usually votes republican. group 1  majority democrats  includes sen. chafee who is known to be pro-environment and is involved in initiatives to improve education  as well as sen. jeffords who left the republican party to become an independent and has championed legislation to strengthen education and environmental protection.
모nearly all the senators in group 1  in table 1  are advocates for education and many of them have been awarded for their efforts  e.g.  sen. fitzgerald has been honored by the naccp for his active role in early care and education  and sen. mccain has been added to the asee list as a true hero in american education . sen. armstrong was a member of the education committee; sen. voinovich and sen. symms are strong supporters of early education
everything nuclearhuman rights   security in middle eastnuclearrightsoccupiedweaponshumanisraelusepalestinesyriaimplementationsituationsecuritycountriesisraelcallstable 1: top words for topics generated from mixture of unigrams model with the un dataset  1 . only text information is utilized to form the topics  as opposed to table 1 where our gt model takes advantage of both text and voting information.
and vocational education  respectively; and sen. roth has constantly voted for tax deductions for education. it is also interesting to see that sen. miller  d-ga  appears in a republican group; although he is in favor of educational reforms  he is a conservative democrat and frequently criticizes his own party-even backing republican george w. bush over democrat john kerry in the 1 presidential election.
모many of the senators in group 1 have also focused on education and other domestic issues such as energy  however  they often have a more liberal stance than those in group 1  and come from states that are historically less conservative. senators hatfield  heinz  snowe  collins  cohen and others have constantly promoted pro-environment energy options with a focus on renewable energy  while sen. danforth has presented bills for a more fair distribution of energy resources. sen. kassebaum is known to be uncomfortable with many republican views on domestic issues such as education  and has voted against voluntary prayer in school. thus  both groups 1 and 1 differ from the republican core  group 1  on domestic issues  and also differ from each other.
모the senators that switch groups the most across topics in the gt model are shown in table 1 based on their gsis. sen. shelby d-al  votes with the republicans on economic  with the democrats on education + domestic and with a small group of maverick republicans on foreign and social security + medicare. both sen. shelby and sen. heflin are democrats from a fairly conservative state  alabama  and are found to side with the republicans on many issues.
1 the united nations dataset
모the second dataset involves the voting record of the un general assembly . we focus first on the resolutions discussed from 1  which contain votes of 1 countries on 1 resolutions. if a country is present during the roll call  it may choose to vote yes  no or abstain. unlike the senate dataset  a country's vote can have one of three possible values instead of two. because we parameterize agreement and not the votes themselves  this 1-value setting does not require any change to our model. in experiments with this dataset  we use a weighting factor 1 for text  adjusting the likelihood of text by a power of 1 so as to make it comparable with the likelihood of pairs of votes for each resolution . we cluster this dataset into 1 topics and 1 groups  numbers are chosen somewhat arbitrarily .
모the most probable words in each topic from the mixture of unigrams model is shown in table 1. for example  every-
g rnuclear arsenalhuman rightsnuclear arms racenuclearrightsnuclearostateshumanarmsuunitedpalestinepreventionpweaponsoccupiedrace뫻nationsisraelspacebrazilbrazilukcolumbiamexicofrance1chilecolumbiaspainperuchilemonacovenezuelaperueast-timorusanicaraguaindiajapanpapuarussia1germanyrwandamicronesiauk...swazilandrussiafijichinausajapanindiajapangermany1mexicogermanyitaly...iranuk...polandpakistanrussiahungarykazakhstanchinachinabelarusindiabrazil1yugoslaviaindonesiamexicoazerbaijanthailandindonesiacyprusphilippinesiranthailandbelarususaphilippinesturkmenistanisrael1malaysiaazerbaijanpalaunigeriauruguaytunisiakyrgyzstantable 1: top words for topics generated from the gt model with the un dataset  1  as well as the corresponding groups for each topic  column . the countries listed for each group are ordered by their 1 gdp  ppp  and only the top 1 countries are shown in groups that have more than 1 members.
thing nuclear constitutes all resolutions that have anything to do with the use of nuclear technology  including nuclear weapons. comparing these with topics generated from the gt model shown in table 1  we see that the gt model splits the discussion about nuclear technology into two separate topics  nuclear arsenal which is generally about countries obtaining nuclear weapons and management of nuclear waste  and nuclear arms race which focuses on the arms race between russia and the us and preventing a nuclear arms race in outer space. these two issues had drastically different voting patterns in the u.n.  as can be seen in the contrasting group structure for those topics in table 1. the countries in table 1 are ranked by their gdp in 1 thus  again the gt model is able to discover salient topics-topics that reflect the voting patterns and coalitions  not simply word co-occurrence alone.
모as seen in table 1  groups formed in nuclear arms race are unlike the groups formed in the remaining topics. these groups map well to the global political situation of that time when  despite the end of the cold war  there was mutual distrust between russia and the us with regard to the continued manufacture of nuclear weapons. for missions to outer space and nuclear arms  india was a staunch ally of russia  while israel was an ally of the us.
1.1 overlapping time intervals
모in order to understand changes and trends in topics and groups over time  we run the gt model on resolutions that were discussed during overlapping time windows of 1 years  from 1  each shifted by a period of 1 years. we consider 1 unique resolutions in this way. the topics as well as the group distribution for the most dominant topic during each time period are shown in table 1.
모over the years there is a shift in the topics discussed in the un  which corresponds well to the events and issues in history. during 1 the resolutions focused on countries having the right to self-determination  especially countries in africa which started to gain their freedom during this time. although this topic continued to be discussed in the subsequent time period  the focus of the resolutions shifted to the role of the un in controlling nuclear weapons as the cold war conflict gained momentum in the late 1s. while there were few resolutions condemning the racist regime in south africa between 1  this was the topic of many resolutions during 1-culminating in the un censure of south africa for its discriminatory practices.
모other topics discussed during the 1s and early 1s were israel's occupation of neighboring countries and nuclear issues. the reduction of arms was primarily discussed during 1  the time period during which the us and soviet union had talks about disarmament. during 1 the central topic of discussion was the israeli-palestinian conflict; this time period includes the beginning of the intifada revolt in palestine and the gulf war. this topic continued to be important in the next time period  1   but in the most recent slice  1  table 1  it has become a part of a broader topic on human rights by combining other human rights related resolutions that appear as a separate topic during 1. the human rights issue continues to be the primary topic of discussion during 1.
모throughout the history of the un  the us is usually in the same group as europe and japan. however  as we can see in table 1 during 1  when the israeli-palestinian conflict was the most dominant topic  us and israel form a group of their own separating themselves from europe. in other topics discussed during 1  us and israel are found to be in the same group as europe and japan.
모another interesting result of considering the groups formed over the years is that  except for the last time period  1   countries in eastern europe such as poland  hungary  bulgaria  etc.  form a group along with ussr  russia . however  in the last time window on most topics they become a part of the group that consists of the western europe  japan and the us. this shift corresponds to the end of the communist regimes in these countries that were supported by the soviet union. it is also worth mentioning that before 1  our model assigned east germany to the same group as other eastern european countries and ussr  russia   while it assigned west germany to the same group as western european countries.1
time
periodtopic 1topic 1topic 1group distributions for topic 1group 1group1group1group1group1nuclearprocedureafrica indep.india indonesiausa
japanargentina colombiaussr
polandturkeyoperativecommitteecalling1generalamendmentrightiranukchilehungarynuclearassemblyafricathailandfrancevenezuelabulgariapowerdecidingselfphilippinesitalydominicanbelarusindependencefinanceweaponscuba
albaniaindia indonesiaalgeria iraqussr
polandusa
japanterritoriesbudgetnuclear1independenceappropriationunpakistansyriahungaryukselfcontributioninternationalsaudilibyabulgariafrancecolonialincomeweaponsegyptafghanistanbelarusitalyn. weaponsisraelrightsmexico indonesiachinausa
japanbrazil turkeyindia
ussrnuclearisraelafrica1internationalmeasuresterritoriesiranukargentinapolandunhebronsouththailandfrancecolombiavietnamhumanexpellingrightphilippinesitalychilehungaryrightsisrael/pal.disarmamentmexico indonesiausa
japanalgeria
vietnamchina brazilindiasouthisraelun1africaarabinternationaliranukiraqargentinaisraeloccupiednuclearthailandfrancesyriacolombiarightspalestinedisarmamentphilippinesussrlibyachiledisarmamentconflictpal. rightsusa
israelchina indiajapan
ukguatemala st vincentmalawinuclearneedrights1usisraelpalestinerussiafrancedominicandisarmamentpalestineisraelspainitalyinternationalsecretaryoccupiedhungarycanadaweaponsrightsisrael/pal.poland czech r.china indiausa
japanrussia argentinacameroon congonuclearrightsisraeli1weaponshumanpalestinehungarybrazilukukraineivory c.usefundamentaloccupiedbulgariamexicofrancebelarusliberiainternationalfreedomsdisarmamentalbaniaindonesiaitalymaltatable 1: results for 1-year-span slices of the un dataset  1 . the top probable words are listed for all topics  but only the groups corresponding the most dominant topic are shown  topic 1 . we list the countries for each group ordered by their 1 gdp  ppp and only show the top 1 countries in groups that have more than 1 members. we do not repeat the results in table 1 for the most recent window  1 .1. conclusions
모we present the group-topic model that jointly discovers latent groups in a network as well as clusters of attributes  or topics  of events that influence the interaction between entities in the network. the model extends prior work on latent group discovery by capturing not only pair-wise relations between entities but also multiple attributes of the relations  in particular  the model considers words describing the relations . in this way the gt model obtains more cohesive groups as well as fresh topics that influence the interaction between groups. the model could be applied to variables of other data types in addition to voting data. we are now using the model to analyze the citations in academic papers to capture the topics of research papers and discover research groups. it would also apply to a much larger network of entities  people  organizations  etc.  that frequently appear in newswire articles.
모the model can be altered suitably to consider other attributes characterizing relations between entities in a network. in ongoing work we are extending the group-topic model to capture a richer notion of topic  where the attributes describing the relations between entities are represented by a mixture of topics.
1. acknowledgments
모this work was supported in part by nsf grant #iis1  and by the defense advanced research projects agency  through the department of the interior  nbc  acquisition services division  under contract #nbchd1. we would also like to greatly thank prof. vincent moscardelli  chris pal and aron culotta for helpful discussion.
