although there have been many prototypes of visualization in support of information retrieval  there has been little systematic evaluation that distinguishes the benefits of the visualization per se from that of various accompanying features. the current study focuses on such an evaluation of nirve  a tool that supports visualization of search results. insofar as possible  functionally equivalent 1d  1d  and text versions of nirve were implemented. nine novices and six professional users completed a series of information-seeking tasks on a set of retrieved documents. there were high interface costs for the 1d visualization  although those costs decreased substantially with experience. performance was best when the tool's properties matched task demands; only under the right combination of task  user  and interface did 1d visualization result in performance comparable to functionally matched 1d and textual tools.
keywords
information visualization  1d  1d  text  evaluation  interface design
1. introduction
as information spaces have become more complicated  substantial attention has been devoted to considering how spatial dimensions can be used to decrease the task demands. although there are numerous prototypes for visualizing large document spaces  e.g.:              there is little in the way of systematic comparison of the value of these approaches.
the current study focuses on trying to provide a controlled comparison of text  1d  and 1d approaches to a set of fairly typical information seeking tasks on a small collection of 1 topranked documents that have been retrieved from a much larger set. insofar as possible  the three interfaces are designed to provide common basic functionality in order to be able to isolate differences in the visualization rather than in the underlying algorithms or ancillary tools that are added to the visualization.
a few studies have conducted evaluations of the value of 1d displays. nowell  france  hix  heath  and fox  described the envision system  in which the user can control how document attributes  such as author  date  or relevance score  are mapped into a 1d display using graphical attributes  such as size  shape  and color. a satisfaction survey showed that users liked the system. user performance was judged successful  but it was measured against the performance of the interface designer using the same system  not against the use of another  presumably less graphical  system.
another 1d evaluation was conducted by veerasamy and belkin . a simple 1d-grid system was used with search keywords along the y-axis  and document ids along the x-axis. each cell of the grid showed the frequency of the corresponding keyword within that document. a user study showed a weak effect in favor of the performance of the visualization over a text-based system. the authors note that traditional measures of information retrieval  ir  effectiveness  such as precision and recall  may not be appropriate for capturing the advantage of visualization-based systems over text-based ones.  in a subsequent paper  veerasamy and ileikes  addressed these limitations by using a constrained relevance judgment task and demonstrated that the graphical tool increased speed and accuracy over textual displays.
there have also been a few studies of 1d-based visualization tools. the hyperbolic browser  simulated changes in appearance of documents spread over a 1d spherical surface. that tool used a focus+context fisheye approach to visualize and manipulate large hierarchies.  a laboratory experiment contrasted using the hyperbolic browser against a conventional 1d scrolling browser with a horizontal tree layout. although users preferred

sigir '1   1 berkley  ca  usa 1-1/1 . . .

the hyperbolic visualization  there was no performance advantage on the task of finding specific node locations.
more recently  swan and allan  performed a controlled study comparing 1  a text-based system   1  a gui oriented system  and 1  the latter enhanced with 1d visualization of document clusters. they wanted to improve so-called  aspect-oriented  ir  which emphasizes finding some specified information  not documents per se. in that context  using recall as a measure  there was a small advantage for the 1d system over text-based  and for

the text-based over the plain gui.  however  there was no evidence for the overall effectiveness of the use of 1d; the system's utility depended on the tasks and the users. experienced users preferred the text-based system  while novices liked the gui systems. some users thought the 1d approach was
 worthless   others thought it natural and intuitive.
in sum  there have been very few studies directly comparing the effectiveness of visualization against functionally equivalent traditional interfaces for ir applications.  previous data shows only modest benefits of visualization in this context.
1 nirve prototype
any assessment is of course likely to depend on the particulars of the visualization that is used and its specific objectives. for our purposes  we have focused on the issue of using visualization to analyze a set of documents that have already been retrieved by a search engine. to that end  the visualization and virtual reality group at the national institute of standards and technology  nist  has developed several prototypes that give users an overview of the results of a document search  .
keyword queries were based on topics from the text retrieval conference  that were designed for the database of all the news stories issued by the associated press for 1. the prise  search engine returned a set of entries from that database  one per document. each entry contained: document title  a unique document identifier  a relevance score  indicating the search engine's estimate of the  goodness  of the match between the document and the query   document length  and the number of occurrences of each keyword.

figure 1.  1d nirve document space widow with clusters of documents displayed as boxes on the surface of a sphere.
colored bars within each cluster box indicate concepts. arcs are similarly color-coded.
the nirve display is organized into two windows: a  document space  window in which document titles  clusters  keywords and concepts are depicted  and a smaller control window for operations that would not map naturally into the document space window. a typical example of a 1d nirve document space window is shown in figure 1. the control panel window is shown in figure 1.

figure 1.  the nirve control panel window for 1d and 1d.
the user can dynamically map a subset of keywords of the query into a concept. the concept can be assigned a name and a color. the association of keywords and concepts is displayed as an interactive legend at the bottom of the document space window.
a concept profile is computed for every document  based on the frequency of the keywords therein. a cluster is then defined as a set of documents all of which have the same subset of concepts. each cluster is represented as a small box on the face of which is a color bar chart indicating the average concept profile of the documents therein. the thickness of the box is proportional to the number of contained documents.
these cluster icons are arranged on the surface of a globe. an icon's latitude is determined by the number of concepts exemplified by the cluster: more concepts cause an icon to be located nearer to the  north pole  of the globe. longitude has no intrinsic meaning; icons are arranged so as to try to place clusters with similar concept profiles near each other. clusters that differ by a single concept are connected by an arc whose color represents the conceptual difference between them. e.g. if cluster a has the concepts  boat    sink   and  ocean   and cluster b has  boat    sink    ocean   and  storm   then they will be connected by an arc color-coded for  storm .
when the user  opens  a cluster  a 1d-document rectangle containing all the document titles is projected outward from the cluster icon  as shown in figure 1. these titles are arranged such that similar titles  i.e. those containing some matching words  have nearby horizontal positions. vertical position is controlled by the relevance score assigned by the search engine. thus similar titles will appear approximately in the same column  with the better scoring titles towards the top. when the user selects a title  netscape displays the full document text. each keyword is highlighted in the color of its containing concept.
users can  mark  documents or entire clusters with a small colored flag to signify their evaluation of that entity as  good   green    bad   red   or  unsure   yellow . the initial value is  unsure . the user can then control the display of any subset of these categories  e.g. suppress  bad  documents  show only  good  or  unsure  documents .

figure 1. document rectangle projected outward from the cluster icon  revealing the document titles
1. method
1 participants
a total of fifteen people participated in the experiment. nine university students without professional computer experience participated as  novice  users. the remaining six participants had professional experience with graphical user interfaces and/or information retrieval systems and participated as  professionals. 
1 equipment
a silicon graphics indy 1 mhz workstation  using softwarebased opengl  was used to test novice users. a silicon graphics onyx workstation  using hardware accelerated opengl  was used to test visualization professionals.
1 experimental condition
there were three experimental conditions in which the dimensionality of the basic information display varied while preserving as much common functionality as possible. as described in detail above  in the 1d condition  the document space is presented as set of concept cluster boxes placed on the surface of a sphere  figure 1 .

figure 1. 1d nirve screen; the display is flattened version of 1d nirve
for the 1d condition  the globe was flattened into a map on which all clusters could be displayed simultaneously  as shown in figure 1. since there is no third dimension to convey cluster box density  this information is conveyed as the width of a gray bar located at the bottom of the box. arcs indicating conceptual similarity are depicted as straight lines  and the field of document titles is simply drawn over the display of cluster icons.
in the text condition  documents were organized as a list grouped by cluster. clusters were labeled with their colored concept profile; each cluster then was followed by its list of document titles  as shown in figure 1.
in the 1d and 1d conditions  participants could zoom in or out of a cluster and could mark clusters and individual documents with colored flags. the number of documents within a cluster and the associated concept strengths were displayed at the top of the screen when the cursor was placed over the cluster box.
in the text condition  only individual documents could be marked using a red checkmark and only scrolling  not zooming  was available. the number of documents and associated concepts for a cluster were displayed as part of the scrollable text list at the beginning of each cluster.

figure 1. text nirve screen with document titles grouped under cluster headings in a web browser list.
1 topics and tasks
a variety of topics and tasks were used in order to provide some generality of results.  all experimental conditions used the same six topics: smoking bans  gene therapy  acid rain  aviation  gun control  agent orange. for each topic  participants were given a series of sixteen tasks  see table 1  consisting of basic activities that are often included as part of more complex information analysis and retrieval.  participants had to locate  compare  and describe documents or clusters given specific types of information such as title  key concepts  or content.
1 procedure.
a between-subjects design was used in order to maximize information on performance changes with system use within the given time constraints.   three novices and two professionals were quasi-randomly assigned to each of the three visualization conditions. all participants completed questionnaires providing demographic information and self-ratings of computer skills.
1. locate and skim the article entitled   on the science front.  mark as green the article and cluster box so that you can find it later.
1. locate and skim the article that discusses where aids came from. mark as green the article and cluster box so that you can find it later.
1. display in netscape the article you marked earlier   on the science front.  locate another article with a similar title.
1.	locate all clusters that discuss research and cure.
1. list in order the three-five main topics that are most frequently represented in the document space.
table 1. sample tasks   from a set of sixteen  used in the gene therapy topic

participants completed two topics on each of three consecutive days. each topic session lasted approximately 1 to 1 minutes. visual and audio recordings were made of all experimental sessions.
participants were informed that they would be using a computer program to assist in searching through associated press newspaper articles from 1. they were given a brief description of the document space and control windows  see above . the experimenter provided instructions and examples for each of the basic interaction techniques.
for each topic  the experimenter submitted the query and defined the concepts in order to maintain constancy across participants. each of the sixteen tasks was presented individually. participants were asked to  think aloud  or verbalize what was going through their minds as they were executing each task. all participant responses were timed. participants were given three minutes to complete each task.  if a task was not completed in the threeminute time period  a hint and an additional minute was provided to assist the participant. after each topic participants were offered a 1-minute break.
the first topic tasks were conducted as a training session guided by the experimenter. like all other topic sessions  it consisted of retrieval followed by restructuring of keywords into concepts  followed by sixteen tasks. during this tutorial session  participants were allowed to ask questions and receive guidance from the experimenter.
upon completion of all six sessions  a post-experimental questionnaire asked the participants to list what they liked and disliked about the tools they had used.
1. results: quantitative
both quantitative and qualitative results were collected. the quantitative data consist of speed of task completion. this measure was selected since  given a restricted number of documents and enough time and motivation  any task could be completed successfully. the restricted time frame focuses on the ability to complete a task efficiently and avoids some of the potential problems with self-imposed time limits. tasks that were not completed by the initial deadline were assigned a time of three minutes for purposes of analysis.
preliminary analyses indicated that the majority of participants failed to complete a task requesting  all relevant articles  on a topic  so the data from that task were dropped from subsequent analyses. in addition  there were inconsistencies in the way participants dealt with the tasks of identifying the major topics  so these were also dropped from subsequent analyses. the remaining thirteen tasks were grouped into eight types  as shown in table 1  based on the main component activities.
1 overall visualization effects
overall  the text condition showed the fastest response times. the reliability of these differences is demonstrated by the standard fstatistic with 1 and 1 degrees of freedom  f 1  = 1  p =.1.*  the following sections outline how this global result may be due to prior familiarity with the alternative approaches to information access  interface constraints  and task characteristics.
1 experience with the system
the differences among text  1d  and 1d performance could be  in part  a function of experience. as shown in figure 1  the greatest improvement in response time over the course of the experiment was for the 1d condition  linear contrast interaction: f 1  = 1  p  .1 . some improvement was also found for the 1d condition  with a slight decrement in performance for the text condition. the effect of limited 1d experience is also evident in the contrast between the first tutorial session  and the second session which participants completed without assistance  as shown in figure 1.  whereas text and 1d performance improved during the second session  1d performance declined.

a. locate a cluster given its concepts
b. locate a document given its concepts & title
c. locate a document given its concepts
d. recover a document given its title and follow a link to a new document
e. recover a document and locate a new document given its title or content
f. recover and compare contents of documents
g. determine the concepts for a document and locate it given its title
h. determine the concepts for a document and locate it given its contents
table 1. task type groupings & component activities

1 testing groups / machine properties
the pattern of responses was similar for the two experimental groups. however  for the  professionals  there was no mean response time difference between the 1d and 1d conditions  whereas there was a difference of almost forty seconds for the  novices   probably due to the substantially slower machine. this large difference between groups is not reliable  f 1  = 1  p =.1  in part reflecting the substantial variability in performance.

figure 1. time to locate target by session and visualization
method collapsed across task type
1 task type
there were reliable differences in response time among the different types of task as depicted in figure 1. overall response time depended on task demands for all conditions. for example  when a task required locating a cluster based on specified concepts  as in task type a  responses were relatively fast and accurate. however  when the participants had to determine which clusters to access by extracting concepts from a title  g  or a content description  h   response time was substantially longer.
the relative effectiveness of different visualization techniques also depended upon the task type  f 1  = 1  p =.1. overall  this interaction seemed to be due to the match between task characteristics and interface properties. for example  in searching for a title  g   participants in the text condition could just scroll through the entire list of titles  whereas those in the 1d and 1d condition had to first find the appropriate cluster or grouping.
1. results: qualitative
in addition to task performance  several qualitative measures were used. first  the experimenter observed and recorded sequences of actions of each user. these were also videotaped and reviewed to augment the description of performance. second  participants were asked to say aloud what they were thinking. these were combined into a set of strategies used for each task. finally  at the conclusion of the study  participants were asked to list what they liked and disliked about the visualization tools used in the experiment.
the outcomes of those assessments focused on a few basic issues: grouping of documents into clusters  coding of concepts by color  visibility and legibility of displays  speed and complexity of system response  and the ability to maintain a sense of spatial location. the consequences of each of these factors for performance are described below.

figure 1.  time to locate target by task type  identified in
table 1  and visualization method collapsed across session
1 cluster grouping
overall  participants' reports and performance suggested that they understood and generally liked the organizational aspects of nirve including clustering of documents and the relational arrangement of clusters.
participants used the grouping of concepts into clusters to narrow their search for particular documents. if a particular concept was not of interest  the participant knew which set of documents to avoid. the grouping also contributed to the selection of potential documents because it showed concept combinations that might not have otherwise been considered. in a number of cases  participants did not immediately appreciate what it meant to be grouped into a cluster. as a consequence  for example  during the first session or two participants often had difficulty with a task that required locating similar articles. that task was substantially easier once the search could be confined to a single cluster or a few neighboring clusters.
the relational structure of the clusters in the 1d and 1d displays was also used to keep track of preferred clusters. the vertical placement of clusters according to the number of concepts helped users adopt the strategy of linking up or down the space depending on their needs of adding or subtracting concepts. many 1d and 1d participants would start from one pole of the globe and navigate through various links. in a number of cases  they began with the lowest level containing the minimal number of  potential  concepts required to find a document  and then worked their way up the globe or map until they found a matching document.
1 color coding
the most frequently used feature of the nirve interface was color. users in all three conditions took advantage of colorconcept mapping. the text condition benefited the most from this dimension  making this otherwise tedious list more efficient than anticipated. instead of skimming or quickly reading the list of concepts at the beginning of each cluster  participants adopted the strategy of scanning the associated colors. this strategy is efficient because visual scanning of color  an automatic process  takes less time and effort than scanning words.
the text users' ability to understand the information  space  was also enhanced by the frequency of appearance of the color-coded concepts. when asked to identify the most frequently represented concepts and their spatial layout  users indicated  through their verbal protocols  that it depended on which color appeared the most in the list. scrolling quickly up and down the list was sufficient enough to extract this information.
the strategy of using color for quick identification was adopted among the 1d and 1d users as well.
1 visibility / legibility
a critical feature of each display was the ability to easily identify concepts and read titles. in the text condition  this was rarely a problem since the concept labels and titles remained a fixed size. in the 1d and 1d conditions  in contrast  there were substantial problems with identification. as more concepts were added  the number of clusters increased  and their size on the screen for a given view decreased  making it more difficult for participants to distinguish colors in the cluster profiles. in general  the ability to use color-coding for searches decreased markedly once the number of concepts exceeded about five.
legibility of concepts at the bottom of the document space window was also a problem. the size of the text changed with the number of items. beyond roughly eight concepts  it became difficult to read the keywords and concept labels. a similar legibility problem occurred for the document titles. all 1d and 1d participants had difficulty reading the article titles that projected from the cluster boxes. users dealt with this problem by clicking on the article title to bring it up in netscape. this clicking required additional time for any task  since participants had to call up and read each title individually in netscape instead of scanning the title as is intended by the design. there were times when users forgot a previously read article title and would have to click on it again to bring it up in netscape to access the legible version.
these results point to the more general phenomenon of visual real-estate tradeoffs.  as more space is given to visualization  as in the current 1d and 1d display of clusters  less space is available for textual displays.  these can be addressed by a new level of tradeoffs in degree of overlap  sequential displays  and a variety of other options  but each such solution requires its own cost-benefit analysis.
1 interface speed and complexity
as the demands on the display and interaction increase  the speed of the machine becomes a more dominant factor in a user's performance. the effects of slower machine speed for the novices were noticeable primarily for the 1d interface. there was always a delay or lag between the physical manipulation of the spaceball and the  corresponding  movement of the sphere. in a number of cases  participants exerted too much force on the spaceball  hoping to speed up the process  inadvertently causing it to rotate out of control; this often caused those participants to  get lost in the space.  participants often expressed frustration and adopted strategies for task execution that required less updating of the document space. in a number of instances  participants would reset the view of the document space because they lost track of their current procedure while focusing on their inability to control the sphere.
delays in system response also impeded performance. when participants clicked to zoom a cluster  the motion was not always apparent. attempting the zoom a second time caused the motion to stop  requiring the participant to start the process over again. in other instances  participants did not press a mouse button hard enough  but interpreted the lack of response as the typical system delay.
the number and complexity of actions was also an issue. scrolling and mouse-clicking are familiar text-based interaction techniques. in contrast  the 1d interaction techniques - using a spaceball for navigation and using the mouse for opening  zooming  centering  and marking documents and clusters - were more demanding  especially among novice users. most participants had no problems grasping the conceptual aspect or layout of the document space  but their ability to work in that space was hindered by the difficulty associated with maneuvering through the document space.
1 maintaining spatial location
one of the functions of 1d is to provide a means of accessing larger sets of information that cannot readily be captured in a single screen. all participants seem to grasp this functionality. however  once rotation of the sphere was initiated for access to specific information  some participants became confused and unable to efficiently navigate the space. remembering the spatial relationships that were no longer in view was one difficulty. the other was tracking relative location on the sphere. pilot testing had suggested that this might be a problem  so we placed an alphabet sequence around the globe's equator. however  most participants tended to ignore this potentially useful set of  landmarks  in their task performance.
1. conclusions and future work
the utility of visualization techniques derives in large part from their ability to reduce mental workload. the results of this study suggest that such reductions are dependent upon an appropriate mapping among the interface  the task  and the user. in the case of the interface  for example  pilot studies had demonstrated that a mouse provided reasonably low mental workload for navigation in text or 1d modes  but produced a high load for 1d navigation. a spaceball dramatically reduced the cognitive load for the 1d condition because of its natural mapping to our 1d sphere. however  when the spaceball was used with the slower machine  delays in responses resulted in greater numbers of participant errors and more frustration.
user experience also influenced performance. the 1d condition showed the greatest decrease in response time during the experiment  and after six sessions  1d response time was comparable to 1d and text conditions when machine speed was not an impediment. in order to evaluate the effect of user experience more broadly  we reanalyzed the data  splitting participants into two groups based on whether they were above or below the mean in self-reported computer experience  figure 1 . computer skills were relatively unimportant for text  they mattered somewhat for 1d  and they mattered a great deal for 1d. in fact  for those participants with greater computer skills  the 1d condition resulted in more rapid response times than the 1d condition. the combination of these results suggests that 1d visualization cannot be adequately evaluated using only shortterm studies of novice users.
participants also tended to structure the tasks in ways that would decrease cognitive load. in our studies  color-coding turned out to be an especially useful tool across conditions and tasks. it provided a quick means to access clusters of documents.  in contrast  zooming in to read a document title tended to be timeconsuming on the slower machine. so  instead of using zooming  participants would simply open the entire article in a separate window just to read the title.

figure 1. response time for the three interface conditions split by below  low  and above average  high  self-rated computer skills.
the perceived load of the interface was dependent not only on the functionality  but also on the extent to which those functions matched users' expectations  or what we might call interface  fidelity.   in the display of documents in the 1d and 1d conditions  for example  columnar alignment was used to indicate title similarity. a number of participants initially tried to use columnar matching to identify similar titles. however  in several instances  although the most closely aligned titles did show the greatest  relative similarity   they did not match participants' expectation of similar content. as a consequence  those participants tended to abandon the intended aid and scan titles for meaning instead.
overall the available features and the required tasks seemed to matter more than the dimensionality of the visualization. colorcoding of concepts helped to provide grouping regardless of the visualization tool.  searching for a title through a text list was often easier than having to locate a title by first identifying a cluster. in contrast  if documents were linked in  neighboring  clusters  the 1d and 1d tools were easier than a text-based search. it is also important to remember that the current evaluation was limited to 1 retrieved documents. with larger sets of 1 documents scrolling and scanning through text becomes impractical. in that case  1d and 1d visualization may produce a larger relative benefit.
finally  this study  as others  is in many ways constrained by specific visualization tools.  in order to generalize the results to other information retrieval applications  a more principled approach to design and evaluation is needed. in the present study  we focused on controlling for effects of functionality across alternative visualization tools; the results suggested that in at least several cases  the functionality was more consequential than the visualization. in addition  we need to isolate the mental workload imposed by our visualization tools for each of our tasks; preliminary task analyses of this sort  matching models and performance  are promising  .  in order to build on this approach  tasks need to be constructed that more clearly isolate perceptual  cognitive  and motor components  and additional data needs to be collected demonstrating the relationship of those components to the effectiveness of visualization tools.
1. acknowledgments
this research was supported in part by nist contract 1nanb1 and is not subject to copyright.
