the objective of web forums is to create a shared space for open communications and discussions of specific topics and issues. the tremendous information behind forum sites is not fully-utilized yet. most links between forum pages are automatically created  which means the link-based ranking algorithm cannot be applied efficiently. in this paper  we proposed a novel ranking algorithm which tries to introduce the content information into link-based methods as implicit links. the basic idea is derived from the more focused random surfer: the surfer may more likely jump to a page which is similar to what he is reading currently. in this manner  we are allowed to introduce the content similarities into the link graph as a personalization bias. our method  named finegrained rank  fgrank   can be efficiently computed based on an automatically generated topic hierarchy. not like the topic-sensitive pagerank  our method only need to compute single pagerank score for each page. another contribution of this paper is to present a very efficient algorithm for automatically generating topic hierarchy and map each page in a large-scale collection onto the computed hierarchy. the experimental results show that the proposed method can improve retrieval performance  and reveal that content-based link graph is also important compared with the hyper-link graph.
categories and subject descriptors
h.1  information storage and retrieval : information search and retrieval; h.1  information interfaces and
presentation : hypertext/hypermedia
general terms
algorithms  performance  experimentation
keywords
forum search  pagerank  hierarchy generation  clustering  categorization
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
sigir'1  august 1  1  seattle  washington  usa.
copyright 1 acm 1-1/1 ...$1.
1. introduction
¡¡web forum  also named bulletin or message board  is an online portal for open discussions on specific topics and issues. it also can be considered as the upgraded web version of traditional newsgroups. not like the common web sites that are managed by editors  innumerable new postings are created each day on web forums that cover almost any conceivable topic. actually  web forums created some kind of knowledge database which took millions of internet users many years. commercial search engines  e.g. google  and yahoo!   have begun to leverage a small part of valuable information gleaned from such forums. the interesting fact here is that  if one makes a query on google regarding a specific problem such as  my camera got wet   most answers will come from forum pages. now  the tremendous information is hidden behind a large number of forum sites  distributed on the whole internet. how to utilize the information and make it accessible for all the internet users becomes a valuable research topic.
¡¡xi  proposed a learning-based approach to optimize the ranking function for newsgroup search. however  web forums  derived from newsgroups  have distinct characteristics that make the search problem different. in newsgroups  each message is sent in individual email with semi-structured headers. web forums are composed of html pages. they are well-formatted for a better human readability  but not for machine parsing. multiple postings  user profiles  and artificial links are often integrated into one page. for the variety of forums  it becomes a challenging task to automatically extract the structured information from these pages  such as splitting different postings  merging postings into a thread tree. but better than newsgroups  the link information is available in web forums. the most useful links are  reference  links in user postings  e.g. a link preceded by  see my previous posting . moreover  important postings  like  sticky  messages and popular threads  always can be easily reached from any other pages within several clicks. even at the site level  there are still some cross-forum links which give strong  recommendations . therefore in this paper  we try to utilize the link-base ranking methods to improve the search results in web forums.
¡¡link-based ranking techniques have been proven effective for modern web search engines. commonly  the link-based ranking algorithms consider that the hyperlink from one page to another is some kind of recommendation. but this assumption is not always correct. navigational  for most of in-site links  and ad links are common on the internet. and even two hyperlinked pages are often irrelevant . in web forums  the link information becomes more noisy. most links in forums are automatically generated and only for navigations and operations  e.g. replying a thread or sorting threads by dates   rather than recommendations. on the other side  the useful links  including cross-forum links  are relatively rare. therefore  completely relying on these noisy links may not be a good solution.
