in this paper  we describe the design steps for www authoring of adaptive hypermedia via a five layer model. we argu e that we need to introduce the goal and constraints model between the domain model and adaptation and user models  in order to be able to generate adaptive hypermedia on the fly and to a ctually implement the so often quoted re-usage paradigm. we also show the operators necessary to implement functionality at the different levels  and exemplify this layered construction wit h mot  an adaptive hypermedia  in particular  courseware  aut horing system we have built at the eindhoven university of techno logy. 
categories and subjectd escriptors	 
h.1   information systems   models and principles; i.1  artificial intelligence  : knowledge representation formalisms and methods; h.1   information interfaces and presentation  : hypertext/hypermedia - architectures  navigation  user issues ; h.1   information storage and retrieval  : content analysis and indexing - abstracting methods  dictionaries  indexing methods; h.1   information storage and retrieval  : information search and retrieval - clustering  information filtering  query formulation  relevance feedback  r etrieval models  
search process  selection process ; e.1   data : data structures - distributed data structures  graphs and networks ; k.1  computers and education  : computer uses in education - distance learning 
general terms 
design  experimentation  standardization  languages	  theory. 
keywords 
adaptive authoring  adaptive hypermedia  ahs  aham  ontologies  semantic web  rdf  mot 
1. introduction 
adaptive hypermedia is a relatively new field  trac ing back to the early 1s. adaptive hypermedia system  ahs  are b ecoming nowadays more popular  due to their correlation wit h the recent strive of the w1c and the ieee lttf  community towards  ontology-based  customization and the semantic web . the success of such research ahs as aha!   interboo k   tangow  or other web adaptation engines such as firefly  before it was bought by microsoft  has pushed ahs forward. their edge over classical intelligent tutoring syst ems  its  systems  relies on their simplicity: they contai n a simple domain model  user model  usually an overlay model of the domain model   aimed at a quick response  which is extremely beneficial in the speed-concerned www environment. however  for quite a long while there has been a lack of pow erful authoring tools for adaptive hypermedia .  one of the main reasons was the great  but fruitful  diversity in ahs imple mentations  many with implicit models .  recently  stimulat ed by the ripening of the field  a group of researchers is wo rking towards the implementation of adaptation standards    which can stay at the basis of such authoring systems. this l ead to a strive towards obtaining clear explicit models for adaptiv e authoring .
here we build upon aham   a well-known model de veloped at the eindhoven university of technology  and on p revious models proposed by us for the educational field  1    to construct a more general layered model for adaptive hypermedi aa uthoring.
the paper is organized as follows: section 1 introd uces our five layer model for ahs authoring. section 1 populates the proposed model with algebraic operators and draws parallels to an rdf algebra. section 1 exemplifies the defined model an d operator implementations based on mot  an ahs adaptive autho ring system built at the eindhoven university of technol ogy for online adaptive course production. finally  section 1 draws conclusions by summarizing our contributions. 
1. layered model 
previously we have defined a layered model for adap tive hypermedia authoring design methodology for  www  
courseware . this model suggested the usage of the following main three layers: conceptual layer expressing the domain model  cl - with sub-layers: atomic concepts and composit e concepts - with their respective attributes   lesson layer  ll - of multiple possible lessons for each concept map or combinatio n of concept maps  and student adaptation and presentation layer  sapl - based on: adaptation model and presentation model . all these layers should have been powered by the adaptation e ngine  ae . note that already  compared to  we were using t he lesson model  lm  as an intermediate model between the dom ain model  dm  and the user and adaptation model  um  respect ively am .

 
copyrighti sh eldb yt hea uthor/owner s . 
www 1  m ay1-1 1 b udapest h ungary. 
acm 
