existing pseudo-relevance feedback methods typically perform averaging over the top-retrieved documents  but ignore an important statistical dimension: the risk or variance associated with either the individual document models  or their combination. treating the baseline feedback method as a black box  and the output feedback model as a random variable  we estimate a posterior distribution for the feedback model by resampling a given query's top-retrieved documents  using the posterior mean or mode as the enhanced feedback model. we then perform model combination over several enhanced models  each based on a slightly modified query sampled from the original query. we find that resampling documents helps increase individual feedback model precision by removing noise terms  while sampling from the query improves robustness  worst-case performance  by emphasizing terms related to multiple query aspects. the result is a meta-feedback algorithm that is both more robust and more precise than the original strong baseline method.
categories and subject descriptors:
h.1  information retrieval : retrieval models
general terms: algorithms  experimentation
keywords: query expansion  pseudo-relevance feedback
1. introduction
¡¡uncertainty is an inherent feature of information retrieval. not only do we not know the queries that will be presented to our retrieval algorithm ahead of time  but the user's information need may be vague or incompletely specified by these queries. even if the query were perfectly specified  language in the collection documents is inherently complex and ambiguous and matching such language effectively is a formidable problem by itself. with this in mind  we wish to treat many important quantities calculated by the re-
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise  to republish  to post on servers or to redistribute to lists  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
sigir'1  july 1  1  amsterdam  the netherlands.
copyright 1 acm 1-1-1/1 . . .$1. 1.
trieval system  whether a relevance score for a document  or a weight for a query expansion term  as random variables whose true value is uncertain but where the uncertainty about the true value may be quantified by replacing the fixed value with a probability distribution over possible values. in this way  retrieval algorithms may attempt to quantify the risk or uncertainty associated with their output rankings  or improve the stability or precision of their internal calculations.
¡¡current algorithms for pseudo-relevance feedback  prf  tend to follow the same basic method whether we use vector space-based algorithms such as rocchio's formula   or more recent language modeling approaches such as relevance models . first  a set of top-retrieved documents is obtained from an initial query and assumed to approximate a set of relevant documents. next  a single feedback model vector is computed according to some sort of average  centroid  or expectation over the set of possibly-relevant document models. for example  the document vectors may be combined with equal weighting  as in rocchio  or by query likelihood  as may be done using the relevance model1. the use of an expectation is reasonable for practical and theoretical reasons  but by itself ignores potentially valuable information about the risk of the feedback model.
¡¡our main hypothesis in this paper is that estimating the uncertainty in feedback is useful and leads to better individual feedback models and more robust combined models. therefore  we propose a method for estimating uncertainty associated with an individual feedback model in terms of a posterior distribution over language models. to do this  we systematically vary the inputs to the baseline feedback method and fit a dirichlet distribution to the output. we use the posterior mean or mode as the improved feedback model estimate. this process is shown in figure 1. as we show later  the mean and mode may vary significantly from the single feedback model proposed by the baseline method. we also perform model combination using several improved feedback language models obtained by a small number of new queries sampled from the original query. a model's weight combines two complementary factors: the model's probability of generating the query  and the variance of the model  with high-variance models getting lower weight.

1
 for example  an expected parameter vector conditioned on the query observation is formed from top-retrieved documents  which are treated as training strings  see   p. 1 .

figure 1: estimating the uncertainty of the feedback model for a single query.
1. sampling-based feedback
¡¡in sections 1-1 we describe a general method for estimating a probability distribution over the set of possible language models. in sections 1 and 1 we summarize how different query samples are used to generate multiple feedback models  which are then combined.
1 modeling feedback uncertainty
¡¡given a query q and a collection c  we assume a probabilistic retrieval system that assigns a real-valued document score f d q  to each document d in c  such that the score is proportional to the estimated probability of relevance. we make no other assumptions about f d q . the nature of f d q  may be complex: for example  if the retrieval system supports structured query languages   then f d q  may represent the output of an arbitrarily complex inference network defined by the structured query operators. in theory  the scoring function can vary from query to query  although in this study for simplicity we keep the scoring function the same for all queries. our specific query method is given in section 1.
¡¡we treat the feedback algorithm as a black box and assume that the inputs to the feedback algorithm are the original query and the corresponding top-retrieved documents  with a score being given to each document. we assume that the output of the feedback algorithm is a vector of term weights to be used to add or reweight the terms in the representation of the original query  with the vector normalized to form a probability distribution. we view the the inputs to the feedback black box as random variables  and analyze the feedback model as a random variable that changes in response to changes in the inputs. like the document scoring function f d q   the feedback algorithm may implement a complex  non-linear scoring formula  and so as its inputs vary  the resulting feedback models may have a complex distribution over the space of feedback models  the sample space . because of this potential complexity  we do not attempt to derive a posterior distribution in closed form  but instead use simulation. we call this distribution over possible feedback models the feedback model distribution. our goal in this section is to estimate a useful approximation to the feedback model distribution.
¡¡for a specific framework for experiments  we use the language modeling  lm  approach for information retrieval . the score of a document d with respect to a query q and collection c is given by p q|d  with respect to language models ¦È q and ¦È d estimated for the query and document respectively. we denote the set of k top-retrieved documents from collection c in response to q by dq k c . for simplicity  we assume that queries and documents are generated by multinomial distributions whose parameters are represented by unigram language models.
¡¡to incorporate feedback in the lm approach  we assume a model-based scheme in which our goal is take the query and resulting ranked documents dq k c  as input  and output an expansion language model ¦È e  which is then interpolated with the original query model ¦È q:
	¦È new =  1   ¦Á  ¡¤ ¦È q + ¦Á ¡¤ ¦È e	 1 
this includes the possibility of ¦Á = 1 where the original query mode is completely replaced by the feedback model.
¡¡our sample space is the set of all possible language models lf that may be output as feedback models. our approach is to take samples from this space and then fit a distribution to the samples using maximum likelihood. for simplicity  we start by assuming the latent feedback distribution has the form of a dirichlet distribution. although the dirichlet is a unimodal distribution  and in general quite limited in its expressiveness in the sample space  it is a natural match for the multinomial language model  can be estimated quickly  and can capture the most salient features of confident and uncertain feedback models  such as the overall spread of the distibution.
1 resampling document models
¡¡we would like an approximation to the posterior distribution of the feedback model lf. to accomplish this  we apply a widely-used simulation technique called bootstrap sampling    p. 1  on the input parameters  namely  the set of top-retrieved documents.
¡¡bootstrap sampling allows us to simulate the approximate effect of perturbing the parameters within the black box feedback algorithm by perturbing the inputs to that algorithm in a systematic way  while making no assumptions about the nature of the feedback algorithm.
¡¡specifically  we sample k documents with replacement from dq k c   and calculate an expansion language model ¦Èb using the black box feedback method. we repeat this process b times to obtain a set of b feedback language models  to which we then fit a dirichlet distribution. typically b is in the range of 1 to 1 samples  with performance being relatively stable in this range. note that instead of treating each top document as equally likely  we sample according to the estimated probabilities of relevance of each document in dq k c . thus  a document is more likely to be chosen the higher it is in the ranking.
1 justification for a sampling approach
¡¡the rationale for our sampling approach has two parts. first  we want to improve the quality of individual feedback models by smoothing out variation when the baseline feedback model is unstable. in this respect  our approach resembles bagging   an ensemble approach which generates multiple versions of a predictor by making bootstrap copies of the training set  and then averages the  numerical  predictors. in our application  top-retrieved documents can be seen as a kind of noisy training set for relevance.
¡¡second  sampling is an effective way to estimate basic properties of the feedback posterior distribution  which can then be used for improved model combination. for example  a model may be weighted by its prediction confidence  estimated as a function of the variability of the posterior around the model.

 a  topic 1 foreign minorities 
germany b  topic 1 behavioral genetics c  topic 1 when can a
lender foreclose on propertyfigure 1: visualization of expansion language model variance using self-organizing maps  showing the distribution of language models that results from resampling the inputs to the baseline expansion method. the language model that would have been chosen by the baseline expansion is at the center of each map. the similarity function is jensenshannon divergence.
1 visualizing feedback distributions
¡¡before describing how we fit and use the dirichlet distribution over feedback models  it is instructive to view some examples of actual feedback model distributions that result from bootstrap sampling the top-retrieved documents from different trec topics.
¡¡each point in our sample space is a language model  which typically has several thousand dimensions. to help analyze the behavior of our method we used a self-organizing map  via the som-pak package    to 'flatten' and visualize the high-dimensional density function1.
¡¡the density maps for three trec topics are shown in figure 1 above. the dark areas represent regions of high similarity between language models. the light areas represent regions of low similarity - the 'valleys' between clusters. each diagram is centered on the language model that would have been chosen by the baseline expansion. a single peak  mode  is evident in some examples  but more complex structure appears in others. also  while the distribution is usually close to the baseline feedback model  for some topics they are a significant distance apart  as measured by jensenshannon divergence   as in subfigure 1c. in such cases  the mode or mean of the feedback distribution often performs significantly better than the baseline  and in a smaller proportion of cases  significantly worse .
1 fitting a posterior feedback distribution
¡¡after obtaining feedback model samples by resampling the feedback model inputs  we estimate the feedback distribution. we assume that the multinomial feedback models {¦È 1 ... ¦È b} were generated by a latent dirichlet distribution with parameters {¦Á1 ... ¦Án}. to estimate the {¦Á1 ... ¦Án}  we fit the dirichlet parameters to the b language model samples according to maximum likelihood using a generalized newton procedure  details of which are given in minka . we assume a simple dirichlet prior over the {¦Á1 ... ¦Án}  setting each to ¦Ái = ¦Ì¡¤p wi | c   where ¦Ì is a parameter and p ¡¤ | c  is the collection language model estimated from a set of documents from collection c. the parameter fitting converges very quickly - typically just 1 or

1
 because our points are language models in the multinomial simplex  we extended som-pak to support jensenshannon divergence  a widely-used similarity measure between probability distributions.
1 iterations are enough - so that it is practical to apply at query-time when computational overhead must be small. in practice  we can restrict the calculation to the vocabulary of the top-retrieved documents  instead of the entire collection. note that for this step we are re-using the existing retrieved documents and not performing additional queries.
¡¡given the parameters of an n-dimensional dirichlet distribution dir ¦Á  the mean ¦Ì and mode x vectors are easy to calculate and are given respectively by
	 1 	and	x
¡¡we can then choose the language model at the mean or the mode of the posterior as the final enhanced feedback model.  we found the mode to give slightly better performance. 
¡¡for information retrieval  the number of samples we will have available is likely to be quite small for performance reasons - usually less than ten. moreover  while random sampling is useful in certain cases  it is perfectly acceptable to allow deterministic sampling distributions  but these must be designed carefully in order to approximate an accurate output variance. we leave this for future study.
1 query variants
¡¡we use the following methods for generating variants of the original query. each variant corresponds to a different assumption about which aspects of the original query may be important. this is a form of deterministic sampling. we selected three simple methods that cover complimentary assumptions about the query.
no-expansion use only the original query. the assumption is that the given terms are a complete description of the information need.
leave-one-out a single term is left out of the original query. the assumption is that one of the query terms is a noise term.
single-term a single term is chosen from the original query. this assumes that only one aspect of the query  namely  that represented by the term  is most important.
after generating a variant of the original query  we combine it with the original query using a weight ¦Ásub so that we do not stray too 'far'. in this study  we set ¦Ásub = 1. for example  using the indri  query language  a leave-oneout variant of the initial query that omits the term 'ireland' for trec topic 1 is:
#weight 1 #combine ireland peace talks 
1 #combine peace talks  
1 combining enhanced feedback models from multiple query variants
¡¡when using multiple query variants  the resulting enhanced feedback models are combined using bayesian model combination. to do this  we treat each word as an item to be classified as belonging to a relevant or non-relevant class  and derive a class probability for each word by combining the scores from each query variant. each score is given by that term's probability in the dirichlet distribution. the term scores are weighted by the inverse of the variance of the term in the enhanced feedback model's dirichlet distribution. the prior probability of a word's membership in the relevant class is given by the probability of the original query in the entire enhanced expansion model.
1. evaluation
¡¡in this section we present results confirming the usefulness of estimating a feedback model distribution from weighted resampling of top-ranked documents  and of combining the feedback models obtained from different small changes in the original query.
1 general method
¡¡we evaluated performance on a total of 1 queries derived from four sets of trec topics: 1  trec-1   1  trec-1   1  trec-1   and 1  wt1g  trec-1 . we chose these for their varied content and document properties. for example  wt1g documents are web pages with a wide variety of subjects and styles while trec-1 documents are more homogeneous news articles. indexing and retrieval was performed using the indri system in the lemur toolkit  . our queries were derived from the words in the title field of the trec topics. phrases were not used. to generate the baseline queries passed to indri  we wrapped the query terms with indri's #combine operator. for example  the initial query for topic 1 is: #combine ireland peace talks 
¡¡we performed krovetz stemming for all experiments. because we found that the baseline  indri  expansion method performed better using a stopword list with the feedback model  all experiments used a stoplist of 1 common english words. however  an interesting side-effect of our resampling approach is that it tends to remove many stopwords from the feedback model  making a stoplist less critical. this is discussed further in section 1.
1 baseline feedback method
¡¡for our baseline expansion method  we use an algorithm included in indri 1 as the default expansion method. this method first selects terms using a log-odds calculation described by ponte   but assigns final term weights using lavrenko's relevance model.
¡¡we chose the indri method because it gives a consistently strong baseline  is based on a language modeling approach  and is simple to experiment with. in a trec evaluation using the gov1 corpus   the method was one of the topperforming runs  achieving a 1% gain in map compared to using unexpanded queries. in this study  it achieves an average gain in map of 1% over the four collections.
¡¡indri's expansion method first calculates a log-odds ratio o v  for each potential expansion term v given by
		 1 
over all documents d containing v  in collection c. then  the expansion term candidates are sorted by descending o v   and the top m are chosen. finally  the term weights r v  used in the expanded query are calculated based on the relevance model
		 1 
the quantity p q|d  is the probability score assigned to the document in the initial retrieval. we use dirichlet smoothing of p v|d  with ¦Ì = 1.
¡¡this relevance model is then combined with the original query using linear interpolation  weighted by a parameter ¦Á.
by default we used the top 1 documents for feedback and the top 1 expansion terms  with the feedback interpolation parameter ¦Á = 1 unless otherwise stated. for example  the baseline expanded query for topic 1 is:
#weight 1 #combine ireland peace talks  1
#weight 1 ireland 1 peace 1 northern ... 
1 expansion performance
¡¡we measure our feedback algorithm's effectiveness by two main criteria: precision  and robustness. robustness  and the tradeoff between precision and robustness  is analyzed in section 1. in this section  we examine average precision and precision in the top 1 documents  p1 . we also include recall at 1 documents.
¡¡for each query  we obtained a set of b feedback models using the indri baseline. each feedback model was obtained from a random sample of the top k documents taken with replacement. for these experiments  b = 1 and k = 1. each feedback model contained 1 terms. on the query side  we used leave-one-out  loo  sampling to create the query variants. single-term query sampling had consistently worse performance across all collections and so our results here focus on loo sampling. we used the methods described in section 1 to estimate an enhanced feedback model from the dirichlet posterior distribution for each query variant  and to combine the feedback models from all the query variants. we call our method 'resampling expansion' and denote it as rs-fb here. we denote the indri baseline feedback method as base-fb. results from applying both the baseline expansion method  base-fb  and resampling expansion  rs-fb  are shown in table 1.
¡¡we observe several trends in this table. first  the average precision of rs-fb was comparable to base-fb  achieving an average gain of 1% compared to using no expansion across the four collections. the indri baseline expansion gain was 1%. also  the rs-fb method achieved consistent improvements in p1 over base-fb for every topic set  with an average improvement of 1% over base-fb for all 1 topics. the lowest p1 gain over base-fb was +1% for trec-1 and the highest was +1% for wt1g. finally  both base-fb and rs-fb also consistently improved recall over using no expansion  with base-fb achieving better recall than rs-fb for all topic sets.
1 retrieval robustness
¡¡we use the term robustness to mean the worst-case average precision performance of a feedback algorithm. ideally  a robust feedback method would never perform worse than using the original query  while often performing better using the expansion.
¡¡to evaluate robustness in this study  we use a very simple measure called the robustness index  ri 1. for a set of queries q  the ri measure is defined as:
		 1 
where n+ is the number of queries helped by the feedback method and n  is the number of queries hurt. here  by 'helped' we mean obtaining a higher average precision as a result of feedback. the value of ri ranges from a minimum

1
 this is sometimes also called the reliability of improvement index and was used in sakai et al. .
collectionnoexpbase-fbrs-fbtrec
1avgp11  +1% 1  +1% p1.1.1  +1% 1  +1% recall111trec 1avgp11  +1% 1  +1% p1.1.1  +1% 1  +1% recall111trec 1avgp11  +1% 1  +1% p1.1.1  +1% 1  +1% recall111wt1gavgp11  +1% 1  +1% p1.1.1  -1% 1  +1% recall111table 1: comparison of baseline  base-fb  feedback and feedback using re-sampling  rs-fb . improvement shown for base-fb and rs-fb is relative to using no expansion.

 a  trec 1  upper curve ; trec 1
 lower curve 

 b  trec 1  upper curve ; wt1g  lowercurve 
figure 1: the trade-off between robustness and average precision for different corpora. the x-axis gives the change in map over using baseline expansion with ¦Á = 1. the yaxis gives the robustness index  ri . each curve through uncircled points shows the ri/map tradeoff using the simple small-¦Á strategy  see text  as ¦Á decreases from 1 to zero in the direction of the arrow. circled points represent the tradeoffs obtained by resampling feedback for ¦Á = 1.
collectionnbase-fbrs-fbn rin ritrec 11+11+1trec 11+11+1trec 11+11+1wt1g1-11+1combined1+11+1table 1: comparison of robustness index  ri  for baseline feedback  base-fb  vs. resampling feedback  rs-fb . also shown are the actual number of queries hurt by feedback  n   for each method and collection. queries for which initial average precision was negligible  ¡Ü 1  were ignored  giving the remaining query count in column n.
of  1  when all queries are hurt by the feedback method  to +1 when all queries are helped. the ri measure does not take into account the magnitude or distribution of the amount of change across the set q. however  it is easy to understand as a general indication of robustness.
¡¡one obvious way to improve the worst-case performance of feedback is simply to use a smaller fixed ¦Á interpolation parameter  such as ¦Á = 1  placing less weight on the  possibly risky  feedback model and more on the original query. we call this the 'small-¦Á' strategy. since we are also reducing the potential gains when the feedback model is 'right'  however  we would expect some trade-off between average precision and robustness. we therefore compared the precision/robustness trade-off between our resampling feedback algorithm  and the simple small-¦Á method. the results are summarized in figure 1. in the figure  the curve for each topic set interpolates between trade-off points  beginning at x=1  where ¦Á = 1  and continuing in the direction of the arrow as ¦Á decreases and the original query is given more and more weight. as expected  robustness continuously increases as we move along the curve  but mean average precision generally drops as the gains from feedback are eliminated. for comparison  the performance of resampling feedback at ¦Á = 1 is shown for each collection as the circled point. higher and to the right is better. this figure shows that resampling feedback gives a somewhat better trade-off than the small-¦Á approach for 1 of the 1 collections.

figure 1: histogram showing improved robustness of resampling feedback  rs-fb  over baseline feedback  base-fb  for all datasets combined. queries are binned by % change in ap compared to the unexpanded query.
collectionds + qvds + no qvtrec
1avgp11  +1% p1.1.1  +1% ri11  -1 trec 1avgp11  +1% p1.1.1  -1% ri11  -1 trec 1avgp11  -1% p1.1.1  -1% ri11  -1 wt1gavgp11  -1% p1.1.1  -1% ri11  -1 table 1: comparison of resampling feedback using document sampling  ds  with  qv  and without  no qv  combining feedback models from multiple query variants.
¡¡table 1 gives the robustness index scores for base-fb and rs-fb. the rs-fb feedback method obtained higher robustness than base-fb on three of the four topic sets  with only slightly worse performance on trec-1.
¡¡a more detailed view showing the distribution over relative changes in ap is given by the histogram in figure 1. compared to base-fb  the rs-fb method achieves a noticable reduction in the number of queries significantly hurt by expansion  i.e. where ap is hurt by 1% or more   while preserving positive gains in ap.
1 effect of query and document sampling methods
¡¡given our algorithm's improved robustness seen in section 1  an important question is what component of our system is responsible. is it the use of document re-sampling  the use of multiple query variants  or some other factor  the results in table 1 suggest that the model combination based on query variants may be largely account for the improved robustness. when query variants are turned off and the original query is used by itself with document sampling  there is little net change in average precision  a small decrease in p1 for 1 out of the 1 topic sets  but a significant drop in robustness for all topic sets. in two cases  the ri measure drops by more than 1%.
¡¡we also examined the effect of the document sampling method on retrieval effectiveness  using two different strategies. the 'uniform weighting' strategy ignored the relevance scores from the initial retrieval and gave each document in the top k the same probability of selection. in contrast  the 'relevance-score weighting' strategy chose documents with probability proportional to their relevance scores. in this way  documents that were more highly ranked were more likely to be selected. results are shown in table 1.
¡¡the relevance-score weighting strategy performs better overall  with significantly higher ri and p1 scores on 1 of the 1 topic sets. the difference in average precision between the methods  however  is less marked. this suggests that uniform weighting acts to increase variance in retrieval results: when initial average precision is high  there are many relevant documents in the top k and uniform sampling may give a more representative relevance model than focusing on the highly-ranked items. on the other hand  when initial precision is low  there are few relevant documents in the bottom ranks and uniform sampling mixes in more of the non-relevant documents.
¡¡for space reasons we only summarize our findings on sample size here. the number of samples has some effect on precision when less than 1  but performance stabilizes at around 1 to 1 samples. we used 1 samples for our experiments. much beyond this level  the additional benefits of more samples decrease as the initial score distribution is more closely fit and the processing time increases.
1 the effect of resampling on expansion term quality
¡¡ideally  a retrieval model should not require a stopword list when estimating a model of relevance: a robust statistical model should down-weight stopwords automatically depending on context. stopwords can harm feedback if selected as feedback terms  because they are typically poor discriminators and waste valuable term slots. in practice  however  because most term selection methods resemble a tf ¡¤ idf type of weighting  terms with low idf but very high tf can sometimes be selected as expansion term candidates. this happens  for example  even with the relevance model approach that is part of our baseline feedback. to ensure as strong a baseline as possible  we use a stoplist for all experiments reported here. if we turn off the stopword list  however  we obtain results such as those shown in table 1 where four of the top ten baseline feedback terms for trec topic 1  said  but  their  not  are stopwords using the basefb method.  the top 1 expansion terms were selected to generate this example. 
¡¡indri's method attempts to address the stopword problem by applying an initial step based on ponte  to select less-common terms that have high log-odds of being in the top-ranked documents compared to the whole collection. nevertheless  this does not overcome the stopword problem completely  especially as the number of feedback terms grows.
using resampling feedback  however  appears to mitigate
baseline fbp wi|r resampling fbp wi|r said1court1court1pay1pay1federal1but1education1employees1teachers1their1employees1not1case1federal1their1workers1appeals1education1union1collectionqv + uniformqv + relevance-scoreweightingweightingtrec
1avgp11  -1% p1.1.1  -1% ri11  +1% trec 1avgp11  -1% p1.1.1  +1% ri11  +1% trec 1avgp11  +1% p1.1.1  +1% ri11  +1% wt1gavgp11  +1% p1.1.1  +1% ri11  +1% table 1: comparison of uniform and relevance-weighted document sampling. the percentage change compared to uniform sampling is shown in parentheses. qv indicates that query variants were used in both runs.table 1: feedback term quality when a stoplist is not used. feedback terms for trec topic 1: merit pay vs seniority.
the effect of stopwords automatically. in the example of table 1  resampling feedback leaves only one stopword  their  in the top ten. we observed similar feedback term behavior across many other topics. the reason for this effect appears to be the interaction of the term selection score with the top-m term cutoff. while the presence and even proportion of particular stopwords is fairly stable across different document samples  their relative position in the top-m list is not  as sets of documents with varying numbers of better  lower-frequency term candidates are examined for each sample. as a result  while some number of stopwords may appear in each sampled document set  any given stopword tends to fall below the cutoff for multiple samples  leading to its classification as a high-variance  low-weight feature.
1. related work
¡¡our approach is related to previous work from several areas of information retrieval and machine learning. our use of query variation was inspired by the work of yomtov et al.   carpineto et al.   and amati et al.   among others. these studies use the idea of creating multiple subqueries and then examining the nature of the overlap in the documents and/or expansion terms that result from each subquery. model combination is performed using heuristics. in particular  the studies of amati et al. and carpineto et al. investigated combining terms from individual distributional methods using a term-reranking combination heuristic. in a set of trec topics they found wide average variation in the rank-distance of terms from different expansion methods. their combination method gave modest positive improvements in average precision.
¡¡the idea of examining the overlap between lists of suggested terms has also been used in early query expansion approaches. xu and croft's method of local context analysis  lca   includes a factor in the empirically-derived weighting formula that causes expansion terms to be preferred that have connections to multiple query terms.
¡¡on the document side  recent work by zhou & croft  explored the idea of adding noise to documents  re-scoring them  and using the stability of the resulting rankings as an estimate of query difficulty. this is related to our use of document sampling to estimate the risk of the feedback model built from the different sets of top-retrieved documents. sakai et al.  proposed an approach to improving the robustness of pseudo-relevance feedback using a method they call selective sampling. the essence of their method is that they allow skipping of some top-ranked documents  based on a clustering criterion  in order to select a more varied and novel set of documents later in the ranking for use by a traditional pseudo-feedback method. their study did not find significant improvements in either robustness  ri  or map on their corpora.
¡¡greiff  morgan and ponte  explored the role of variance in term weighting. in a series of simulations that simplified the problem to 1-feature documents  they found that average precision degrades as term frequency variance - high noise - increases. downweighting terms with high variance resulted in improved average precision. this seems in accord with our own findings for individual feedback models.
¡¡estimates of output variance have recently been used for improved text classification. lee et al.  used queryspecific variance estimates of classifier outputs to perform improved model combination. instead of using sampling  they were able to derive closed-form expressions for classifier variance by assuming base classifiers using simple types of inference networks.
¡¡ando and zhang proposed a method that they call structural feedback  and showed how to apply it to query expansion for the trec genomics track. they used r query variations to obtain r different sets sr of top-ranked documents that have been intersected with the top-ranked documents obtained from the original query qorig. for each si  the normalized centroid vector  wi of the documents is calculated. principal component analysis  pca  is then applied to the  wi to obtain the matrix ¦µ of h left singular vectors ¦Õh that are used to obtain the new  expanded query
	qexp = qorig + ¦µt¦µqorig.	 1 
in the case h = 1  we have a single left singular vector ¦Õ: qexp = qorig +  ¦Õtqorig ¦Õ
so that the dot product ¦Õtqorig is a type of dynamic weight on the expanded query that is based on the similarity of the original query to the expanded query. the use of variance as a feedback model quality measure occurs indirectly through the application of pca. it would be interesting to study the connections between this approach and our own modelfitting method.
¡¡finally  in language modeling approaches to feedback  tao and zhai  describe a method for more robust feedback that allows each document to have a different feedback ¦Á. the feedback weights are derived automatically using regularized em. a roughly equal balance of query and expansion model is implied by their em stopping condition. they propose tailoring the stopping parameter ¦Ç based on a function of some quality measure of feedback documents.
1. conclusions
¡¡we have presented a new approach to pseudo-relevance feedback based on document and query sampling. the use of sampling is a very flexible and powerful device and is motivated by our general desire to extend current models of retrieval by estimating the risk or variance associated with the parameters or output of retrieval processes. such variance estimates  for example  may be naturally used in a bayesian framework for improved model estimation and combination. applications such as selective expansion may then be implemented in a principled way.
¡¡while our study uses the language modeling approach as a framework for experiments  we make few assumptions about the actual workings of the feedback algorithm. we believe it is likely that any reasonably effective baseline feedback algorithm would benefit from our approach. our results on standard trec collections show that our framework improves the robustness of a strong baseline feedback method across a variety of collections  without sacrificing average precision. it also gives small but consistent gains in top1 precision. in future work  we envision an investigation into how varying the set of sampling methods used and the number of samples controls the trade-off between robustness  accuracy  and efficiency.
acknowledgements
we thank paul bennett for valuable discussions related to this work  which was supported by nsf grants #iis-1 and #cns-1  and u.s. dept. of education grant #r1. any opinions  findings  and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are the authors. and do not necessarily reflect those of the sponsors.
