online curriculum portals aim to support networks of instructors and learners by providing a space of convergence for enhancing peer-to-peer learning interactions among individuals of an educational institution. to this end  effective  open and scalable elearning systems are required to acquire  store  and share knowledge under the form of learning objects  lo . in this paper  we are interested in exploiting the semantic relationships that characterize these los  e.g.  prerequisite  part-of or see-also  in order to capture and access individual and group knowledge in conjunction with the learning processes supported by educational institutions. to achieve this functionality  semantic web  e.g.  rdf/s  and declarative query languages  e.g.  rql  are employed to represent los and their relationships  e.g.  lom   as well as  to support navigation at the conceptual e-learning portal space. in this way  different los could be presented to the same learners  according to the traversed schema navigation paths  i.e.  learning paths . using the apache jetspeed framework we are able to generate and assemble at run-time portlets  i.e.  pluggable web components  for visualizing personalized views as dynamic web pages. last but not least  both learners and instructors can employ the same portal gui for updating semantically described los and thus support an open-ended continuum of learning. to the best of our knowledge  the work presented in this paper is the first online curriculum portal platform supporting the aforementioned functionality. 
categories and subject descriptors 
k.1  computing milieux : computers and education; computer uses in education- collaborative learning h.1 
 information systems : information storage and retrieval; online information systems- web-based services general terms: design  management. keywords: e-learning portals  semantic web  ieee-lom  
jetspeed portlets. 
1. introduction 
for the last decade  teacher bandwidth   i.e.  the number of learners a single instructor can successfully mentor  has been the primary bottleneck in learning. accordingly  most of the instructional technology research has focused on automating instructional design and delivery for reducing the creation costs of learning content but also for the benefits that automation may offer in individualizing the instruction process. nowadays  peerto-peer learning models provide an alternative approach for removing the instructor bottleneck: instead of replacing the instructor with an intelligent system  replace the instructor with a very large network of learners. these models appear to be quite beneficial in informal learning environments  but the constant expansion of learners especially in higher education institutions makes it mandatory to extend them also in formal learning environments. the functionality  both from a technological and pedagogical viewpoint  of web-based e-learning systems aiming to support such networks of learners and instructors is still in its infancy. 
the cornerstone of e-learning systems is the notion of learning objects  los  that capture any chunk of learning material regardless of its form  granularity and functionality. by definition los encapsulate both learning content and appropriate descriptive information  i.e.  metadata . los aim to provide self-describing learning material that once developed can subsequently be exchanged  retrieved and reused. the key factor for supporting large scale interoperability  portability and reusability of los is the quality of the semantic description of los  i.e.  its metadata specification . several e-learning specifications have been proposed in literature like ariadne   ims  and lom  which are recently encoded using semantic web languages like rdf/s  1  1 .  
in this context  an online curriculum aggregates los at various granularity levels  programs  courses  modules  lessons  etc.  using e-learning-specific semantic descriptions while offering a uniform web-based access to the available portal los. we believe that the semantic relationships of los  e.g.  prerequisite  part-of  or see-also  captured by the majority of metadata specifications  have an important pedagogical value when learners browse or query the los of an online curriculum portal. semantic relationships of los have essentially two spaces: the inner space  which implies the lo structure  and the outer space  which delivers the learning value of los within specific contexts of use. both kinds of relationships enable the specification of suitable learning paths within the portal  as sequences of semantically interrelated los that a learner may follow in order to grasp a particular topic. learning paths in an online curriculum can span multiple lessons  modules  courses or even programs allowing 

 
copyright is held by the international world wide web conference committee  iw1 . distribution of these papers is limited to classroom use  and personal use by others. 
www 1  may 1  1  chiba  japan. 
acm 1-1/1. 
learners to access on demand los that best fit their learning needs. in a nutshell  these paths can be used for personalizing the portal information space to learners' needs  thus providing a richer and more complete online learning experience. 
during the specification of the portal functionality for the 
computer science department of the university of crete  csduoc: www.csd.uoc.gr   we have identified three distinct roles of potential users with accordantly different needs for accessing and updating the content or the semantic description of los:   instructors  who can freely insert  delete and modify los. furthermore  they are able to customize the quality  i.e.  schema  and quantity  i.e.  data  of the los' descriptions related to their courses  as well as to provide for each lo its semantic relationships with others los in the same or different courses; 
  learners  who can not only browse or query the los of the portal but they can also insert new los or enrich the description of existing los in order  for example  to extend the available learning paths for a course. moreover  they can annotate existing los thought the portal discussion forums; 
  administrators  who can provide basic information about the people and courses involved in the online curriculum  required for the initial startup of the portal  and they are responsible for defining the appropriate access rights for each user role. 
it should be stressed that the aforementioned user roles are related to appropriate semantic views over the portal information space  which are presented as standard web pages  for navigation  and forms  for updates . these views essentially specify the parts of the e-learning schema s  related to the learning material that a particular user role is authorized to access. consider  for instance  the following scenario conceptualizing and integrating individual with group activities in the context of the learning processes supported by our department. assuming that instructor i1 is responsible for course c1  the portal administrator will have to firstly insert both i1 and c1 using the administration views and then to grant to i1 the appropriate rights for inserting/modifying/deleting los related to c1. after acquiring the appropriate credentials  i1 can directly employ or choose to modify the default views associated with the management of the current course c1 to insert/modify/delete related los. in the first case  i1 can insert a course lecture cl1 as part of c1  through part-of  and relate  through see-also or prerequisite  it eventually to another course lecture cl1  thus  creating a first learning path. subsequntly  a learner l1 selecting course c1 can navigate to course lecture cl1 and can follow the predefined learning paths to discover other los like cl1 related to c1. note that the los browsed each time depend on the current navigational context of learners specified both at the schema  i.e.  the chosen semantic relationships  and data levels  i.e.  the chosen lo . in addition  learners are able to insert annotations  through appropriate posts  or to enrich the descriptions of already visited los. for instance  learner l1 can extend the predefined by i1 learning paths with new los which become available to other learners as long as they are related to at least one of the existing los in the portal. in the second case  an instructor  e.g.  i1  can customize the descriptions of the offered los by excluding  or enriching  the parts of the elearning schema s   that learners are authorized to navigate  annotate or update.  
the csd-uoc online curriculum portal presented in this paper builds on the selene  http://www.dcs.bbk.ac.uk/selene/  project experience and addresses successfully the functionality requirements presented earlier. more precisely  our portal infrastructure: 
  exploits the semantic relationships of los in order to support conceptual navigation and retrieval of los through specific views of e-learning rdf/s schemas. in particular  sequences of semantically interrelated los  e.g.  prerequisite  part-of  see-also relationships  may be traversed by learners in order to grasp a particular topic. 
  supports personalization of los' descriptions for both instructors and learners. the former can easily specify the parts  i.e.  the views  of the e-learning schemas employed by the portal that are more adequate for the description of their los. the latter have the ability to use the specified views in order to either follow predefined learning paths between los or enrich them by inserting and describing new los. 
  offers a uniform web based interface for both browsing and updating the content or the semantic description of available los according to the portal rdf/s schemas.  in order to provide this novel functionality  two key open-source technologies are used: 
  the ics-forth rdfsuite  http://1.1:1/ rdf/  of tools for validating  storing and querying rdf/s schemas and resource descriptions while ensuring scalability and efficiency when accessing large volumes of lo descriptions. in particular  the expressiveness of the declarative rdf/s query language  rql   is crucial for specifying on demand personalized views in order to navigate and update los using the portal rdf/s schema s . 
  the apache jetspeed framework for constructing at run-time portlets  i.e.  pluggable web components  and generating on the fly the dynamic html pages visualizing learners' or instructors' personalized views.  
to the best of our knowledge there is no other online curriculum effort that provides networks of learners and instructors with such unique and powerful features.  the remainder of this paper is organized as follows: section 1 introduces the core rdf/s classes and properties employed to describe los in our portal  as well as to define and explore appropriate leaning paths. section 1 describes the querying and updating functionality we have implemented according to the employed rdf/s schemas. section 1 outlines the architecture of our portal  while section 1 compares our portal infrastructure with related work. finally  section 1 concludes our paper and discusses future research directions. 
1. semantic modeling of online curricula 
as discussed in the previous section  an integral part of an online curriculum portal is the employed metadata specifications. in this respect  we have extended the ieee lom   learning object metadata  rdf/s  1  1  schema provided by the selene project  so as to support fine-grained semantic descriptions of los. as a matter of fact  multiple rdf/s namespaces were used to support a modular and extensible portal schema definition. in this context  the general  technical  or educational characteristics of los  are represented by distinct namespaces capturing the corresponding lom metadata categories. other rdf/s schemata  like vcard   are also employed in order to support detailed people's descriptions associated with the los accessible by our portal.  
more precisely  our portal schema relies on the notion of the learning object  lo  as the root of the inheritance hierarchy of all los classes  see fig. 1  represented by an online curriculum. in this way  lo subclasses inherit as usual attributes with information about their content  title  subject  date  language  format  file  etc.   as well as  their pedagogical value  educational context and level  learning objectives and time  etc. . in this context  we classify los under two broad categories according to the role they can play in the learning processes supported by our portal. on one hand  we can consider classes of los to be  mandatory  - in a loose sense of the term - for successfully accomplishing the learning objectives specified by a curriculum. these classes include the program representing an entire graduate or undergraduate program of studies to which learners have to subscribe  the course usually defined in a credit based educational system as a part of a program  the module capturing the part of a course aiming to address high-level learning objectives  the lesson  which can be part of a module  capturing the part of a course related to detailed learning objectives  as well as various kinds of assignments representing  as subclasses of the component class  homework assigned to learners assisting a course. on the other hand  we can consider classes of los to represent  in a broader sense  supporting material  i.e.  supporting learners in their self-study. these classes include books  online resources  software  etc.  and they are also represented as subclasses of the component class. the above partitioning of los classes  enable us to refine the rdf/s specification  i.e.  the domain range classes  of the lom semantic relationships of los like prerequisite  part-of  or see-also  as well as  to enforce appropriate consistency rules when updating los' descriptions. in particular  los of the former category can be inter-related only through prerequisite and part-of relationships while they can be related with los of the latter category only through see-also. finally  los can be associated with their providers  persons and/or institutions  through the relationships creator or contributor. 
 
fig. 1 overview of the online curriculum rdf/s schema 
furthermore  since the los accessed through an online curriculum are not always physically stored in the portal  we distinguish between the uri of a lo employed by its rdf/s description  and generated automatically by our portal  and its physical location on the web  web resource class  or the portal file system  unloadable resource class . for example  los classified under the book or online resource classes need only to be described using their urls on the web instead of the file names used to upload los like lectures.  
it is worth noting that despite our efforts for a modular  extensible and intuitive rdf/s schema design  the portal information space one has to master still remains incredibly rich. hence  los' providers may encounter difficulties when inserting or modifying los' descriptions due to a misleading or even erroneous understanding of the los' semantics. for this reason  we decided not to expose los' providers directly to the entire rdf/s schema of our portal  but instead to specify and visualize appropriate semantic views on top. these semantic views correspond to portal lo categories and subcategories  as shown in table 1. to each one of these  sub categories corresponds a different level of detail thus allowing the course's customization by the involved instructors. by choosing a  sub category as enabled  or disabled  an instructor actually permits  or forbids  access to the corresponding rdf/s schema view and in turn the associated resources. the correspondence of categories/views with the rdf/s classes of the portal schema is also illustrated in table 1. finally  by enabling a specific view  the subsuming views corresponding to los' subclasses become also available. in this way  instructors are able to decide which of these views will be used for describing and accessing the los involved in their courses. los cannot be inserted  updated or retrieved by learners unless the instructor enables the corresponding view  ensuring the integrity and consistency of los' descriptions across browsing  querying and updating tasks of an online curriculum portal. 
 
           fig. 1. semantic relationships of los the rdf/s schema presented in this section intends to represent a semantically rich information space for describing and relating los without at the same time complicating portal access and management. allowing los to reside physically outside the portal opens the scope of an online curriculum to vast amounts of online web resources  under  of course  the assumption that they can be sufficiently described using the portal schema. partitioning the available schema classes of los  as mandatory or supporting learning material  is expected to facilitate both instructors and learners to better grasp the portal e-learning conceptual space  i.e.  lo semantic relationships . providing a per course personalization mechanism of the schema intends to address information overload issues by simplifying the lo description and updating tasks. 
1 semantic relationships 
one of the novel features of our portal is its ability to exploit the available relationships defined among the lo classes in order to implement conceptual navigation and retrieval. thus  learners are not obliged anymore to navigate back and forth or issue full text queries in order to find a specific lo  but instead they can explore the already established semantic relationships to contextually access los in the portal. in this way  instructors  or peer learners  can easily lay out learning paths that one might follow to grasp the topics of a particular course. we believe that the semantic relationships of los play a crucial role especially in peer-to-peer learning environments where networks of instructors and learners have the ability to freely insert or modify los and their descriptions while at the same time they are striving for a meaningful and consistent access to online curriculum portals. fig. 1 illustrates the semantic relationships of los in our rdf/s schema refining the prerequisite  part-of  and see-also relationships of the ieee lom metadata specification . more specialized relationships  e.g.  rhetoric like explains  could be defined by the instructors upon request to the portal administrators.  
for example  a learner l1 starting from a course can navigate through the prerequisitecourse relationship and retrieve los belonging to the target prerequisite course s . alternatively  l1 can choose to visit a course lecture  where  s he can discover whether another lecture or a module is required to fully understand the content of this lecture. but l1 can also find out whether this lecture is required for any assignments that  s he has to fulfill in order to successfully assimilate course material. in this context  we can consider prerequisitecourse and requires as  strong  relationships  literally forcing a learner to follow a specific learning path while partofmodule and seealso are rather  weaker  relationships suggesting a path but not forcing learners to follow it. it is under the instructor's responsibility to decide which of them should be employed along with the los inserted in the portal. it should be stressed that in order to operate properly our portal does not require any of the los' relationships. however  by discarding the semantic relationships of los the whole effort is reduced to a typical e-learning web site with none of the powerful features of the online curriculum portals presented in this paper.  
1 learning paths  
following the web tradition  learning paths within the portal are essentially represented as sequences of semantically interrelated los that a learner can follow so as to grasp a particular course's topic. learning paths can either be preset by the instructor or devised by the learners as they enrich the semantic relationships of portal los. the los accessed each time depend on the current navigational context of learners specified both at the schema  i.e.  the chosen semantic relationships  and data levels  i.e.  the chosen lo . thus  different los could be presented to the same learners  according to the actually traversed semantic relationship originating from the same lo. in a nutshell  these paths can be used for personalizing the portal information space to learners' needs  thus providing a richer and more complete online learning experience. 
for example  we assume that a learner l1 is interested in course cs1 as depicted in fig. 1. then  l1 chooses to access the module named  client-side architectures  and follow the partof relationship to course lecture  client-side development . given that to fully understand the topic of this particular course lecture  learners should have background knowledge of  java rmi and serialization  the instructor has specified the corresponding cs1 lecture as a prerequisite lo. through this relationship learner l1 accesses the description of this particular course lecture  and discovers that an interesting assisting lecture on  java applets  is available and relevant to  her his self-study. so  even though this lo was not initially included by the instructor in the learning path of course cs1  learner l1 discovers a lecture that fits better his own needs by traversing the existing lo semantic relationships. another learner l1 following the same learning path insofar may instead judge that the required course lecture on  java exception handling  is more useful for her/his homework. then   s he may traverse the corresponding learning path and access the associated source code example  throw demo.java .  
table 1. portal semantic views/categories and their corresponding rdf/s schema classes 
portal 
main 	view/
category portal  
subcategory
 level 1 portal 
subcategory 
level 1 rdf/s 
schema 
class general 
information   course course objectives   course grades   course announcements   announcement lectures course  course lecture  assisting  assisting lecture  supplementary  supplementary lecture assignments homework  homework  laboratory  laboratory  project  project  online test  online test exams midterm  exam  final   1st period   exam  final  1nd period   exam supporting material books main main   additional additional  papers journal journal   conference conference  programming examples executable code executable code   source code source code  handouts  handout  tutorials  tutorial  manuals  manual useful resources software  software link  online courses  online course  research projects  research project  faqs  faq  
it becomes obvious that other learners could follow quite different paths even completely ignore the path s  specified by the instructor of cs1. the opportunities for learning more and new things in different ways from day to day are considerably increased when learners are provided with the ability to insert and semantically describe new los found  for instance  on the web. 
1. querying and updating online curricula 
our online curriculum portal relies on the translation of the users'  administrators/instructors/learners  navigation into appropriate rql queries. these queries capture the specific browsing or querying actions of a user along with their navigation history inside the portal. rql expressiveness enables us to formulate the adequate complex queries so as to retrieve los matching the filtering criteria  at the schema or the data level  set by a learner. so for every possible browsing or querying action a corresponding rql query is generated on the fly using the schema  i.e.  classes and relationships  and the data  i.e.  los  information of the accessed portal views. the results of rql queries are presented to the users by dynamically constructed web pages  which encapsulate the rql queries required to continue their browsing/querying in the portal by taking into account the history of already performed actions. furthermore  insertion  modification or deletion of los in the portal is implemented using the rdfsuite update api. more precisely  the multimedia content of los is stored under the file system while their semantic descriptions are updated into the rssdb store. once again rql queries are used to retrieve the available semantic descriptions of the lo currently been modified. finally  ad hoc queries are also supported using appropriate query forms as for updates. 
1 rdf/s queries 
learners are allowed to browse and update the part of the portal rdf/s schema for a specific course that the instructor has chosen earlier  i.e.  according to the selected views/categories. learners can login either as anonymous users  without any insert/update capabilities  depending on course policy some extra access restrictions might apply  or as registered users having full access privileges to the portal functionality. all users will start from the portal's default pages so as to choose the program and course they are interested in and then they will be transferred to the course's initial page. learners can browse around either by choosing a starting point from the categories menu or by selecting one of the associated los or even by using standard back and forward buttons of the web browser. learners are presented with an intuitive web interface that gives them access to the portal los. the navigation is based on constructing and executing adequate rql queries for every browsing action. more on translating the user navigation actions to rql queries can be found at . 
1 rdf/s updates 
users  administrators/instructors/learners  are able to insert/modify/delete los or their descriptions according to the attributed credentials and the semantic views offered by the portal. instructors are responsible for choosing which views/categories will be made available for the specific course  thus  enabling los that fall under a certain category to be inserted. based on these views  each time a lo is inserted  modified or deleted  narrower views are specified by employing web forms. these forms visualize the corresponding class definitions and load the existing attribute values or relationships of a specific lo. consequently  the instructor or the authorized learner is able to inspect the existing semantic descriptions of the lo at hand. it should be also noted that the association of two los requires their prior existence in the portal. thus  the deletion of one of them results to the automatic deletion of the corresponding relationship. the portal undertakes the responsibility of preserving lo descriptions in a consistent state according to the schema part specified in the enabling view while informing users about the effect of each performed update action. the existence of schema-based views for each update web form ensures a logical/view data independency of the portal resources. 
for example  let us assume that an instructor wishes to insert a course lecture. firstly   s he needs to ensure that the corresponding view has already been enabled and then to employ the appropriate update form provided by the portal  fig. 1b . from this point on  an instructor or a registered learner is able to fill the values of the attributes foreseen by the portal schema for the involved lo class and associate the newly inserted lo with others using one of the available semantic relationships. when the whole update process is completed  the description of the new lo is inserted into the rssdb store in order to be subsequently accessed by other instructors or learners.  
1. csd-uoc portal architecture 
in this section we will present the overall architecture of the csd-
uoc online curriculum portal we have developed and implemented  and discuss various design decisions. in order to build the user interface  we rely on the apache jetspeed portlet framework and rdfsuite rql queries  which are executed against so as to retrieve the corresponding rdf/s descriptions of los. in the sequel  we will detail how the user's navigation is translated into rql queries which are evaluated against an rssdb database holding the rdf/s descriptions of los in postgresql. we will also present the translation into html of the obtained rql query results at each navigation step using the apache jetspeed portlets and associated jsp and xsl files. 
1 apache jetspeed and portlets 
apache jetspeed  http://portals.apache.org/jetspeed-1/  is an open source framework for the creation of dynamic portals based on a standardized portlet api. this framework provides the necessary tools to deploy and manage portlets. a portlet is a software component responsible for the creation of a specific part of the web page under consideration. after the construction of the html page parts  jetspeed provides the mechanism  through the turbine framework  which is mainly based on the use of psml configuration files  so as to assemble at run-time an entire html page visualizing the personalized view of the specific user. 
portlets are registered components of the framework and can be used in any order and combination to construct a web page. each user role in jetspeed is associated with one or more portlets. when jetspeed authenticates a user then its corresponding portlets are  loaded   i.e.  are performing the necessary actions to construct the dynamic web page to be presented. each portlet in our portal has an associated jsp  java server pages  file that is executed in order to generate the portlet's contents. jsp are automatically translated to servlets through the servlet container employed to run through the servlet container employed to run jetspeed inside  e.g.  apache tomcat. in our portal  since each user's navigation is translated into an rql query  we additionally need a way to interpret the returned rdf/s results. this is done by using the appropriate xsl  extended stylesheet language   transformations' file  so that rdf/s described resources  returned by user navigation initiated rql queries  can be transformed to html and thus displayed by normal web browsers. the portlet is responsible for contacting the rql interpreter in order to retrieve the corresponding query results  fig. 1 . 
in our portal  two portlets are available for the anonymous user. the left  according to its space arrangement  portlet  fig. 1a  is responsible for providing a global entry point to the portal categories regardless of the user's browsing actions. the right portlet provides the information area where the result of user's browsing/querying actions is displayed using the mechanism described previously. the information displayed in this portlet can be either the aggregation of the semantic descriptions of several los of a specific type  e.g.  all course lectures  or the description of a specific lo. through the proper rdf/s schema relationships we can also navigate among resources without having to necessarily pass through the left portlet. the available left-portlet categories for a specific course are renewed by the left portlet in every user navigation action  thus accounting for any updates. in order to avoid repeating rql queries to the database  this information is loaded  during portal start-up  into the  main  memory  the shared memory space of the container . in this context  when the views which will be made available for a particular course are changed by an instructor  then to ensure consistency appropriate updates are also performed into the rssdb store. 
 
fig. 1.  a  the initial course page and  b  an update form 
1 user authentication 
users have two options when deciding to enter the online curriculum portal. the first is to navigate through the portal as a common  anonymous user. in this way  they do not need to authenticate themselves but they might be excluded from certain areas of the portal like the ones containing grading information about the visited course or the ability to post to the course's online forums. users can alternatively be authenticated using an ldapbased authentication service hosted by the educational institution and thus acquiring the necessary credentials to fully access or update the resources of the portal. successful authentication enables users to access different portlets than the ones for the anonymous user  i.e.  different views of the semantically described los and assigns to them a role in the portal. as mentioned earlier  the available roles are the ones of administrator  instructor and learner along with the anonymous user. 
 
fig. 1. the csd-uoc online curriculum portal architecture 
1. related work 
online curriculum portals aim to support networks of instructors and learners by providing a space of convergence for enhancing peer-to-peer learning interactions among individuals of educational institutions. to this extent  they significantly differ from both commercial and open-source e-learning portals. commercial e-learning portal development tools  even high-end ones like outstarts' trainersoft1  readygo's webcoursebuilder1 and macromedia's coursebuilder1  aim to facilitate users in creating e-learning content while in their majority do not address semantic interoperability issues. compared to online curriculum portals they mostly use e-learning metadata only a posteriori and  thus  the semantic relationships of los are ignored when navigating the e-learning portals. 
on the other hand  strident efforts have taken place to create and maintain lo repositories for various e-learning communities. they can be considered as learning content management systems  lcms  and can be divided to either online catalogs of external los or digital libraries. the former are holding only the semantic descriptions of los stored elsewhere  like the multimedia educational resource for learning and online teaching  merlot 1  the campus alberta repository of learning objects  careo 1 and telecampus1. the latter maintain both internal and external los like smete1. although they employ standard e-learning metadata specifications to describe the available los  they mostly rely on full text queries as the only means to access los in a disconnected way from the actual learners' navigation  and thus lacking basic functionality of online curriculum portals. 
learning management systems  lms  and the reference models they implement  like the shareable content object reference model1  scorm  and the open knowledge initiative1  oki  share similar motivations with our work. scorm supports sequencing rules that can be used to specify learning paths of individual los rather than semantic relationships of los committing to e-learning rdf/s schemas. that way  the association among different los takes place only at design/authoring time not allowing for on demand browsing of los and thus cannot take advantage of associations established by the learners or other instructors. 
online curriculum portals can be also compared to semantic web brokerage systems aiming to support large-scale knowledge sharing. for example  ontology-based portals  like odesew   based on webode platform   ontoweb and ontoportal   can also be considered as related to our work although their access and visualization interfaces are too generic to be directly used in e-learning environments1. as a matter of fact  many researchers have argued that learning is not the same as knowledge transfer . moreover  universal1  is a b1b brokerage platform aiming to support higher education institutions wishing to advertise and exchange their los. it provides an rdf/s-based catalog that can be browsed to locate and access los of interest. furthermore  edutella1 provides a peer-to-peer infrastructure for connecting peers supporting different types of repositories  query languages  and metadata schemas. each peer implements a number of basic services such as querying  replication and mapping between different e-learning schemas. unlike our portal infrastructure  these systems are lacking personalization facilities for conceptual navigation and retrieval of los by declarative queries taking into account the navigation of learners during a session both at the ontology and the resource levels  readers are referred to  for a detailed presentation of our portal gui and query-based personalization . 
