whereas schools typically record mounds of data regarding student performance  attendance  and other behaviors over the course of a school year  rarely is that data consulted and used to inform day-today instructional practice in the classroom. as teachers come under increasing pressure to ensure success for all of their students  we are attempting to provide tools to help teachers make sense of what is happening in their classrooms and take appropriate proactive and/or remedial action. one such tool is a web service we've dubbed the classroom sentinel. the classroom sentinel mines electronic gradebook and other student information system data sources to detect critical teaching and learning patterns and bring those patterns to the attention of the teacher in the form of timely alerts. in this paper  we introduce the notion of classroom patterns  present some examples  and describe a framework for alert generation and delivery. 
 
categories and subject descriptors 
k.1  computers in education : computer uses in education - computer-managed instruction  i.1  artificial intelligence : applications and expert systems - office automation  h.1  information systems applications : office automation - workflow management  k.1  computers and society : organizational impacts - reengineering. 
general terms: design  human factors 
keywords: classroom pattern detection  data-driven decision making  data integration  alert generation  teacher cognition. 
1. introduction 
in order to comply with mandates calling for more accountability regarding student achievement  most notably the no child left behind act of 1   k-1  i.e.  compulsory education  teachers are feeling increasing pressure to ensure that all of their students succeed in the classroom. our work is predicated on the observation that  whereas schools typically collect reams of data regarding student academic performance  attendance  and other kinds of behavior over the course of the school year  little of that data is used in a proactive way by teachers to influence their day-to-day instructional decision-making in the classroom. this strikes us as a ripe opportunity to bring information technology to bear in helping teachers become more responsive and reactive to the emerging and ongoing student performance trends in their classrooms. 
how can information technology be used to help schools attain the goal of improved achievement for all students   there are a variety of possible approaches  many of which have already been tried. one possibility is to build instructional software that teaches core academic subjects such as math and reading directly to students  but such solutions almost by definition bypass the teacher and are not well-integrated into the classroom. adoption of this type of courseware in traditional classrooms has been spotty at best . more recently  there have been numerous data visualization efforts that seek to provide school administrators with school and districtwide summaries of student performance  e.g. the school report card . such systems definitely have their place  but they provide macro-level views that are very blunt instruments for affecting change in day-to-day classroom activities. we have chosen instead to focus on a point of leverage that has largely been ignored to date:  empowering the teacher in the classroom. we provide professional tools to the teacher to help him or her become a more effective manager of student information and a more data-driven day-to-day instructional decision-maker.  
the classroom sentinel is a web service we have built that mines electronic gradebook  attendance  and other student information system  sis  data sources to detect critical teaching and learning patterns in the data. once a pattern is detected  its existence is brought to the attention of the teacher in the form of a timely alert  at which time the teacher may choose to take some appropriate responsive action or not. the classroom sentinel is designed as a middleware web service that can draw on arbitrary third-party software vendor data sources as long as the structure of the data source and some form of access is made available to the service.  
the classroom sentinel is one component of the teacher's workbench   a web application that provides an integrated suite of tools to help the teacher manage the classroom. in addition to the detection of student performance patterns and the delivery of alerts  teacher's workbench includes an electronic daily planner which supports linkages to instructional resources  and a student profiler which integrates and organizes demographic and longitudinal student information from a variety of data sources. in this paper  however  we are focusing on the classroom sentinel component of the system. 
the overall goal of the classroom sentinel is to improve day-to-day instructional decision-making by providing teachers with a finergrained  more timely understanding of the ever-changing patterns of student proficiency in their classrooms. teachers currently use student performance data rather passively to support the assignment of grades rather than actively to inform future instructional practice. 

copyright is held by the international world wide web conference committee  iw1 . distribution of these papers is limited to classroom use  and personal use by others. 
www 1  may 1  1  chiba  japan. acm 1-1/1. 
 
given the large number of students they teach and the many demands made on them  teachers typically have little time to pore over their gradebook and planbook data searching for interesting patterns to inform future practice. furthermore  they have little access to longitudinal and/or demographic data about their students to lend perspective on what's happening and to calibrate instructional goals. to remedy this situation  the classroom sentinel actively mines the teacher's data and delivers notifications  thereby amplifying the teacher's ability to analyze and understand student performance in a timely way. the teacher is put in a position to respond quickly when it counts  rather than at the end of an entire unit of instruction  end of semester  or end of year when it is too late to affect outcomes. 
a variety of technical challenges confront the continued development and deployment of the classroom sentinel. as mentioned previously  the classroom sentinel is part of a larger web application known as teacher's workbench  which has been deployed in prototype form in six schools across two large urban school districts. a successful deployment involves reading and integrating disparate data sources  many of which may not be fully  ready  for integration  performing efficient event-driven data analysis for large numbers of teachers and students  and perhaps most importantly  defining critical yet useful and usable teaching and learning patterns that teachers can understand and act upon.  
teacher's workbench bears a family resemblance to a number of other commercial and academic systems that offer classroom management functionality  such as the microsoft class server   and chancery student management solutions . these systems typically provide strong support for administrative data reporting  and may provide tools for teachers to peruse the data upon which administrative reports are based. however  to our knowledge these systems do not provide the kind of active data mining  automatic notification  and resource retrieval provided by the classroom sentinel. 
1. anatomy of an alert 
 
figure 1. teacher's workbench alert delivery. figure 1 shows an example of a pattern detected by the classroom sentinel and the corresponding alert delivered to the teacher through teacher's workbench. all alerts are delivered in the  heads up  section of the teacher's workbench application  where the alerts are organized by class and student. alerts appear in a list that is refreshed on a periodic basis in response to the availability of new data and the subsequent detection of new instances of patterns. in this particular alert  a pattern has been detected in the performance of a particular student  carl farella  this alert is based on actual data collected at one of our partner's sites but all of the names have been changed . the system has detected that this student has done reasonably well on homework and other assignments  average of 1  but has done significantly worse on tests  average of 1 . in addition to reporting the basic pattern  the alert offers a couple of possible  explanations  namely   that carl has test anxiety or possibly poor test-taking skills  and offers links to a number of resources for remediating these problems. finally  the alert offers the teacher the opportunity to email this alert to the student and/or his parents  and include links to either all or some subset of the resources. 

from this example  it can be seen that an alert is composed of three main parts: 1  an observed pattern of performance  1  a set of possible explanations  and 1  a set of possible responses. given the relative paucity of data available for our analyses  and the philosophical impossibility of making definitive statements about causality in non-experimental classroom situations  the best we can do is offer possible explanations for the patterns observed. it is up to the teacher  who has a much better grasp of the situational and contextual factors  to choose the best possible explanation offered  or to reject them all and posit another. 
in addition to these three basic parts  defining a new alert type also involves specifying the following: 
event triggers. in order to maximize the efficiency of the system and minimize the amount of data analysis required  alert types are associated with various event triggers. one such trigger would be the appearance of new assessment data. in our example  the  inconsistent achiever  pattern would be re-matched whenever the grades for a new assessment become available to the system. 
precedence relationships. some patterns are preferred over others as the best characterization of what is happening in the classroom. for example  one of our patterns   student performance drop   detects when a student's performance has fallen precipitously. another   difficult assessment   detects when the average grade on an assessment is significantly lower than the averages of other assessments. these are potentially competing characterizations of the same phenomenon  and when both are detected   difficult assessment  is more parsimonious and should be preferred. 
state relationships. once an alert type has been issued for a particular student  the system allows other alert types to be turned on or off in recognition of the student's new  state.  as a somewhat degenerate case of such a state relationship  the delivery of an alert type for a certain student may disable the delivery of any more alerts of that type for that student  this would be the case for our example alert . as a somewhat more interesting case  after a  student performance drop  alert has been issued for a particular student  a whole new set of alert types may become activated that serve to scrutinize the student's behavior carefully. in this way  an  at-risk  student can be put on watch and monitored closely.  aggregation relationships. if similar patterns have been detected for more than one student  it may be useful for the teacher to receive an aggregate alert that lists all students that exhibited the pattern rather than individual alerts for each student. in this way  the teacher can take remedial action on an entire subgroup of students at once. the system supports the specification of rules for the aggregation of alerts. 
user-defined parameters. the system allows users  teachers  to turn alert types on and off  and to specify various parameters and thresholds. figure 1 shows the teacher's workbench alert settings panel that teachers use to control the alert generation process.


 
figure 1. alert generation control panel. 
figure 1. alert generation framework. 

 
 
in the example shown  the user can specify what percentage drop is necessary to trigger the grade drop with absence alert  and whether an inferential statistical test should be applied to validate the difference. also  the user can specify what length of prior interval the system should check for absences associated with the drop in performance. 
alerts are predefined according to the elements described above and programmed into the system in an alert library. there are currently about twenty such alerts defined operationally in our system  and we are working to implement more. we work with the teachers at our partner sites as well as ibm education consultants to generate new ideas for useful patterns  and to identify possible explanations and appropriate  best practice  resources to respond to the patterns. 
1. alert generation framework 
figure 1 provides a schematic view of the alert generation process and its constituent software modules. in the description below  we proceed from start to finish of the process in a roughly clockwise traversal of the figure.  
first  the data integrator module reads gradebook  demographic  and other kinds of student data from various school district data sources. this data is reformatted and organized in a standardized data cache for easy access by the remaining alert generation modules. the data integrator module can provide information about the current state of student and classroom data as well as identify new classroom  events  that necessitate new alert generation requests. 
next  the alert selector module selects those alert types that are triggered by the current set of new events for further processing. from this set  the alert selector retains those that have not been turned off by the user. the remaining set is parameterized by a mixture of default and user-specified parameters as directed by the user. 
the alert planner module takes the set of triggered  parameterized alert types and generates a queue of alert processing requests  which can be considered the  plan  for alert generation. an alert processing request specifies not only the alert type but also the  analysands  of the alert  i.e. the set of students  subgroups of students  etc. for whom the alert is applicable. this determination is made through consideration of both current student/classroom  state and the  scope  of the alert type. so  for example  if a particular alert type is enabled only for a student if that student has already received an alert of another type  the data integrator module is queried at this point to determine whether a particular student is in fact eligible for the alert. in this way  lists of enabled and disabled analysands are assembled for each alert type in the alert processing request. the type of analysand assembled is determined by the  scope  of the alert. all of these alert properties  enablement relationships  disablement relationships  scope  etc.  are defined declaratively when a new alert type is authored. 
the alert planner passes the queue of alert processing requests to the alert detector module. this module cycles through the set of processing requests  deferring those for whom a potentially superceding request exists downstream in the queue  and skipping those for whom a superceding alert has already been generated. if neither case holds  the appropriate generation algorithm is executed for the current alert type for each of the analysands. if the pattern characteristic of the alert type is detected  a new  raw  alert has been generated. 
finally  the set of new raw alerts is passed to the alert reporter  a post-processing module that performs alert aggregation and alert filtering as specified by the user. the polished alerts that emerge from this module are stored in teacher's workbench content manager along with aligned instructional resources for eventual retrieval and perusal by the user. 
1. a fledgling alert taxonomy 
where do alert ideas come from   we generate new ideas for alerts in two ways: 
1. working backwards. here we accept as a given the kinds of data that might typically be available in a current classroom. then  with the help of the teachers and administrators at our partner sites and education consultants  we try to imagine what kinds of alerts might be interesting and/or possible given the available evidence.  
1. working forwards. here we start with a theoretical framework that attempts to enumerate and organize all possible factors that have been shown to affect learning outcomes in children . this framework includes such diverse factors as parental involvement  lesson quality  and student mastery of prerequisites. then we ask what evidence might bear on the measurement of each factor. finally  we consider whether this evidence is available  and if it is not  what might be necessary to collect it.  
for practical reasons  we have chosen to focus primarily on the first strategy  i.e.   working backwards   in our initial deployments of the system. the alerts we have implemented are based on actual data currently collected by the districts and residing in electronic form. but in parallel  we are working with the school districts to define new kinds of alerts that necessitate new data collection and storage practices in the districts. this is the kind of work that will truly revolutionize classroom practice and lead to the most dramatic realization of the classroom sentinel vision.  
what makes for a good alert  of course  the most important criterion is that the alert should detect an important performance pattern in the classroom that the teacher wants to recognize and act upon. but there are other  more pragmatic  concerns that we face in the successful deployment of an alert. any new alert proposal should satisfy the following constraints: 
  data upon which it is based is available  see the  working backwards  strategy above  
  has sufficiently high frequency to justify the overhead of creation and deployment 
  is not obvious  but even an obvious alert may be very useful if we can help the teacher respond to it  thus amplifying the teacher's ability to manage classroom situations  
  is not arcane or obscure  teachers must resonate to it and must understand the data behind it  
  is non-controversial  but no child left behind necessitates the monitoring of certain subgroups  
  can be delivered in a timely manner so that it is actionable given these constraints  and with the advice and consent of our teacher partners  we have generated a preliminary set of alert ideas and organized them into a taxonomy. this preliminary taxonomy  along with a few examples in each category  is shown in table 1.  
in order to guide and prioritize our efforts  we conducted a survey of our teacher partners  asking them to rate the usefulness of 1 candidate alert ideas. twenty-five teachers and administrators from both partner sites completed the survey  which asked respondents to rate the potential usefulness of an alert on a standard five-point likert scale  where a rating of 1 was  not at all useful  and 1 was  very useful.  the 1 candidate alerts were distributed fairly evenly across all the categories and included the examples shown in the table. 
the middle column of table 1 shows the results for each category. interestingly  the highest-rated category was  classroom management   followed closely by  student performance.  lagging at the bottom were the categories of  student opportunity  and  subgroup performance.  the highest rated alert in the entire set was  student has an in-school suspension   a classroom 
management alert  with an average of 1. it appears that  aside from the increasing demands regarding student achievement  teachers are still preoccupied with the more prosaic yet essential tasks of classroom management  such as simply keeping track of the many students under their charge. interestingly  teachers were not that interested in receiving reports about differences in subgroup performance  even though nclb requires attention to these patterns of performance. one possible explanation is that teachers do not have differentiated instructional tools and strategies readily available yet for dealing with these kinds of differences. another explanation is that nclb reporting requirements have not had time to be filtered down from the administrative level to the practicing teacher level. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
category rating examples student 
performance 1 student grade has dropped significantly from past assessment. 	 
student has performed below average in more than one class this week.  
student did poorly on the assessment and completed less than average number of homeworks. 
struggling student has performed above average on assessment. student trait 1 student is performing below average on exams and quizzes but average to above average on other assignments. student is performing below average on out-of-class assignments but above average on in-class assignments. 
student should perform  average  below average  above average  based upon their past standardized test scores. student was excessively absent last year. student 
opportunity 1 student is within range to increase marking period grade by a letter on next assessment. 	 
student performed above average on quiz and may be able to tutor other students for the upcoming test. 
student has achieved a 1 or better for all quarters and is a candidate for an honors or ap program. 	 subgroup 
performance 1 english as a second language  esl  students performed below average on a particular math assessment although they have above average to average scores on other math assessments  high verbal content  . 
emotionally disabled  ed  students have a higher than average absence rate. 
girls did not perform as well as boys on a particular assessment  speeded  . teacher 
performance 1 last assessment has low correlation with other assessments administered this quarter. 
students scored significantly lower/higher than last assessment. 
students that performed average or above average on topic quiz scored below average on topic test. 
it has been two weeks since the last assessment. 	 
assessments involving standard 1 had the lowest student average. 	 	 classroom management 1 student has an in-school suspension. 
student has been absent/tardy n times. 
student is missing a grade for an assessment and the makeup deadline is tomorrow. student has a birthday tomorrow.  table 1. preliminary alert taxonomy with examples. 

 
1. usability and practical issues 
as mentioned above  teacher's workbench and the classroom sentinel have been deployed in six schools in two large urban school districts for about a year. although we have struggled with  a variety of technical issues such as the integration and subsequent analysis of disparate and sometimes messy school district legacy data sources  perhaps our greatest ongoing challenges are in the realm of usability engineering. we cite just a few recurring usability issues here:  
 first  our experience has shown that the number and frequency of alerts generated for the teachers must be finely tuned. as mentioned earlier  teachers are already stretched to their cognitive and attentional limits and have little capacity available to consider analyses of student performance. the alerts must be timely  insightful  and of a reasonable number so as not to overload the teacher. we have found that alerts that are accompanied by useful instructional resources to remediate the problem are more warmly received than those that provide no such support. as shown above  teachers have control over individual alert parameters and thresholds  which can be tuned to make the alerts more or less sensitive and thereby more or less numerous.  
the deployment of a tool such as the classroom sentinel raises a number of thorny privacy issues  for both teachers and students. historically  the classroom has been a teacher's personal and private dominion  which has been both a boon and a bane to the practicing teacher. although the classroom can be a teacher's sanctuary  it can also be a place of profound loneliness and professional isolation. a tool like the classroom sentinel reaches into this private dominion and detects patterns of performance that can be served up either for the teacher's personal and private use  or shared among fellow teachers and administrators. although sharing such information should provide rich opportunities for mentoring and professional development  the sometimes adversarial relationship between teachers and administrators may make such opportunities unwanted. our policy has been to let the individual teacher control their own level of sharing. 
aside from teacher privacy  a tool such as the classroom sentinel impacts student privacy as well. if tapped into the appropriate data sources  the classroom sentinel can provide longitudinal information about student performance in past years  as well as a more complete picture of student performance across classes in the current year. such information provides teachers with a much richer  contextualized view of their students  which should lead to more informed and principled interventions. but some may see value in the current  situation where teachers have no preconceived notions and students are afforded a  fresh start  in each class at the beginning of every school year.  
finally  the classroom sentinel can provide analyses of student performance based on race  ethnicity and gender  the kinds of analyses required by the no child left behind act . but our observation is that the teachers have not been particularly interested in these analyses to date. our explanation is that there is a lack of instructional strategies and resources readily available for remediating such differences. a tool such as the classroom sentinel highlights the need for more basic research in this area. 
1. future work and conclusion 
the classroom sentinel is part of teacher's workbench  an ibm reinventing education 1 grant project. we are currently beginning the final year of a three-year research and development effort. currently  a pilot is ongoing at two grant sites involving approximately 1 users. in terms of further development  we are enhancing the efficiency and extensibility of the alert generation framework  extending the library of alerts  and improving our instructional resource alignment strategies in order to suggest more useful and effective responses to the performance patterns detected.  
we face a number of ongoing challenges in the successful development and deployment of the classroom sentinel. first  our web-service middleware approach involves forging working partnerships with the vendors of the end-user applications whose data we wish to tap  most notably electronic gradebooks. second  the it infrastructures of the schools we work with are often not prepared to support the rich data integration we require. third  and perhaps most importantly  we need to work with our teacher partners to define a new kind of teacher practice that is much more centered on the ongoing analysis  monitoring  and response to classroom performance patterns. 
1. acknowledgements 
we thank nancy aitken  rick boehme  lei kuang  kevin ho  cliff kramer  mark laff  and jung-mu tang for their extensive help in implementing and deploying teacher's workbench.  
