message hierarchies in web discussion boards grow with new postings. threads of messages evolve as new postings focus within or diverge from the original themes of the threads. thus  just by investigating the subject headings or contents of earlier postings in a message thread  one may not be able to guess the contents of the later postings. the resulting navigation problem is further compounded for blind users who need the help of a screen reader program that can provide only a linear representation of the content. we see that  in order to overcome the navigation obstacle for blind as well as sighted users  it is essential to develop techniques that help identify how the content of a discussion board grows through generalizations and specializations of topics. this knowledge can be used in segmenting the content in coherent units and guiding the users through segments relevant to their navigational goals. our experimental results showed that the segmentation algorithm described in this paper provides up to 1% success rate in labeling messages. the algorithm is being deployed in a software system to reduce the navigational load of blind students in accessing web-based electronic course materials; however  we note that the techniques are equally applicable for developing web indexing and summarization tools for users with sight.
categories and subject descriptors
h.1  information interfaces and presentation : hypertext/hypermedia-navigation  user issues; h.1  information interfaces and presentation : multimedia information systems-hypertext navigation and maps; h.1  information storage and retrieval : content analysis and indexing-abstracting methods  indexing methods; k.1  computers and society : social issues-assistive technologies for persons with disabilities
general terms
algorithms  experimentation  human factors  performance
keywords
discussion boards  segmentation  navigational aid  assistive technology for blind users
 this work is supported by nsf itr grant  itr-1.
copyright is held by the international world wide web conference committee  iw1 . distribution of these papers is limited to classroom use  and personal use by others.
www1  may 1  1  chiba  japan.
acm 1-1/1.
buzz proj.	vander  ryantue may 1  1:1 amre: buzz proj.	true  thomasthu may 1  1:1 pmre: buzz proj.	vander  ryansat may 1  1:1 pm	re: buzz proj.	grain  robertsun may 1  1:1 pmre: buzz proj. vander  ryansun may 1  1:1 pmassignment 1	rodriguez  luisa thu may 1  1:1 pm
report for assig. 1 true  thomas	thu may 1  1:1 pm
re: report for assig. 1 candan  kasim mon may 1  1:1 am
assignment #1	atilla  john	fri may 1  1:1 pm
	re: assignment #1	candan  kasim	mon may 1  1:1 am
questions on #1	roosewelt  daniel sat may 1  1:1 pm
	re: questions on #1 candan  kasim	mon may 1  1:1 am
	re: questions on #1	ray  luisa	mon may 1  1:1 pm
	re: questions on #1	home  chris tue jun 1  1:1 am
report length	true  thomas	tue jun 1  1:1 am re: report length candan  kasim	wed jun 1  1:1 am
assignment # 1	bird  sarah	tue jun 1  1:1 pm

figure 1: a hierarchy of messages posted to a course discussion board: although the subject headers of the messages can give some idea about what the postings are about  they provide little information to help differentiate the actual contents of different messages
1. introduction
　complex web sites continue to proliferate  as web-based information infrastructures become integral parts of educational  corporate  and e-commerce organizations. yet  due to the continuously increasing sizes and complexities of these infrastructures  it is also becoming more and more difficult for users to understand and navigate through such sites. the navigation problem is especially critical for users without sight. with the passage of the 1 web accessibility mandate  many companies and federal government agencies are required to follow accessibility guidelines when designing web sites. such guidelines are very effective when designing mostly static and non-individualized information outlets. however  when
  the material being delivered is information rich yet arbitrarily structured 
  the content is dynamically generated through multiple users' inputs  interactions  and annotations  or
  the users have to follow non-linear  individualized pathways through the material 
the navigational challenge is compounded  even for users with sight. unfortunately  these characteristics are very common in online course servers and discussion boards.

figure 1: two sample views from course pages containing announcements  course documents  e.g. lecture notes   course information  e.g. syllabus   assignments  external links  group pages  and discussion boards. in this paper  we focus on providing access to discussion boards  such as those included in these samples1 motivation
　like many others  asu's educational web site1 hosts course home pages  containing lecture notes  a syllabus  assignments  project material  course related documents  announcements  external links  links to materials residing in different hosts or different locations in the course server   grades  calendars  group pages  and discussion boards  figure 1 . some of this content is fixed  meaning that it does not change during a semester  e.g. course syllabi   but majority of the content evolves  e.g. discussion boards  through contributions by the instructors  teaching assistants  and students. our students without sight emphasized that  although the screen reader software enables them to access the electronic material  they still have to struggle when accessing richlystructured  heterogeneous  and constantly growing content  such as discussion boards  figure 1 . with the aim of reducing the navigational load of blind students  we are developing a software interface  called icare-assistant  that provides context- and task-dependent navigational guidance when accessing on-line educational materials that are already available for the use of sighted students. state-of-theart browser-based interfaces  and existing navigational helps  such as site maps and visual cues   alleviate this load for only sighted users and are generally not applicable to dynamically growing content. instead  we employ transparent guidance and dynamic adaptation techniques  1  1  in icare-assistant to help students without sight. such dynamic adaptation and guidance requires an understanding of the inherent  but implicit  structures of the content available at the educational web sites. in this paper  we focus on the challenge of identifying coherent information units  or segments  in dynamically growing hierarchical content in discussion boards.
1 problem statement: topic segmentation ofdynamicallygrowinghierarchicalweb content  discussion boards 
　unless a hierarchy corresponds to a well-defined conceptual structure  it does not present information effectively: if the structure is not self-revealing  higher level nodes in the

figure 1: a chain of three messages: the messages are too short and incomplete for indexing: they obtain their context from their relevant ancestors. once it is identified that these three messages are within the same context  keywords can be inherited between these messages for proper indexing.
hierarchy cannot direct users to the information available at the lower levels. this is the case for message hierarchies in discussion boards which grow freely through postings of different users at different times: for instance  a posting containing a question may lead to new postings that are not necessarily directly related to the original question. thus  just by looking at the subject headings or contents of the first few postings in a message hierarchy  one may not be able to guess the actual contents of the replies deeper in the same thread  figure 1 . this complicates the task of navigating within message hierarchies in discussion boards. while storing personal  already-read email messages  for reuse  as in microsoft's stuff i've seen   contextual cues  such as time and author  can be used to search for and present information. however  in a discussion board  where the content is freely growing through multiple users' inputs  interactions  and annotations  such contextual cues may not be enough  figure 1 . in order to provide proper navigational support to users  a guidance system must identify  as precisely as possible  the next possible step s   based on the current navigational context. when the context changes  the system should adapt to this change by identifying the

figure 1: an example showing three types of topic divergences in a message hierarchy: the original discussion theme of  web segmentation  leads to a new discussion topic   web privacy    a more general discussion on the topic of the  segmentation problems   and a more specific thread on the 'topic segmentation  issues
most suitable content that has to be brought closer to the user in the navigational space  1  1 . such dynamic adaptation of the information space requires an indexing system which can leverage the logical relationships between various contents  such as messages that refer to the same assignment within the same context. most messages  on the other hand  are too short to be meaningful by themselves  and therefore  they obtain their context from their parents and ancestors  figure 1 . however  as a discussion hierarchy grows through posting of new messages  its content and context will also evolve and possibly diverge from the original posting  figure 1 . although not all postings will cause a divergence from the initial theme  some of the postings will
  focus on a specific aspect of the original message 
  take the discussion to a more general platform  or
  diverge significantly from the original theme  introducing an entirely new discussion theme.
in a loosely structured environment  where the structure itself is not known  topic distillation  1  1  1  and web site summarization  algorithms are useful in understanding the underlying structure. in linearly authored  such as text  documents  linear text segmentation techniques  1  1  can be useful in identifying coherently authored components. however  in freely  and arbitrarily  evolving message hierarchies in discussion boards  the challenge is not to identify how a document is authored  but to discover how the discussion topics have evolved and how they can be segmented to identify context  topic  boundaries to facilitate indexing  retrieval  ranking  and presentation of appropriate information units  or segments  to the user.
　thus  the segmentation problem within this context can be defined as searching for special nodes   which are the entry points to new  general  or specific topics   within a single hierarchy of dynamically evolving web content  figure 1 . once the segmentation is completed  each segment can be independently indexed  keyword can be inherited  bottom-up or top-down  based on the generalization and specialization behaviors  and users can be directed to the

figure 1: topic segmentation of a discussion hierarchy
entry point of the most relevant segment to their current context.
1 contributions of this paper
